



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


The Port Rules for the Port Of Visakhapatnam





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


The Port Rules for the Port Of Visakhapatnam


Rule THE-PORT-RULES-FOR-THE-PORT-OF-VISAKHAPATNAM of 1933





            Published on 23 September 1933
          



              
                Commenced on 23 September 1933
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 23 September 1933.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






The Port Rules for the Port Of Visakhapatnam
Published vide Notification Gazette of India, 1933, Part 1, page 974
1595.
 


No. 222-P.&L.-(19)/31 (I), dated the 23rd September, 1933. - In exercise of  the powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (1-A) of section 6 of the Indian Ports Act,  1908 (15 of 1908), read with section 2 of the Visagapatnam Port Act, 1931 (10 of 1931),  and in suppression of the rules at present in force at the Port of Vizagapatnam, the  Governor-General in Council is pleased to make, with effect from the 6th October,  1933, the following rules for the Port of Vizagapatnam the same having been  previously published, as required by sub-section (2) of section 6 of the first named  Act, namely:
(i)
Definition of Harbour
1.
 


For the purpose of these Rules the term "Harbour" shall mean and include  every part of the Port of Visakhapatnam as defined by the Governor-General in Council.
Port Conservator includes Deputy Port Conservator and any Harbour Master or  Pilot duly authorized to act on behalf of the Port Conservator.
Traffic Manager includes the assistants to the Traffic Manager duly authorized  to act on his behalf.
(ii)
Entering or leaving port
2.
 


All sea-going vessels on entering or leaving the port between sunrise and  sunset shall fly their national flag, and when entering the port, each vessel shall  show her number. Vessels anchoring in the roadstead must leave sufficient sea-room  for vessels to enter or leave the harbour.
Sailing' vessels of 100 tons and upwards shall not enter or leave the harbour  unless towed by one or more of the port tugs.
2A.
 


(1)
Subject to the provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and the instructions  below, Pilotage is compulsory except for those vessels specifically exempted in writing  by the Conservator or some officer empowered by him to give such authority.
(2)
The Pilot shall board in-coming ships and disembark from outgoing ships  about 4 cables length East of the Outer channel Light Buoys in a position 17°--41'- 17" N. 83°-18'-30"E. and assist in piloting a vessel to and from her assigned berth  and also in berthing and unberthing the vessels.
(3)
The Master shall supply to the Pilot all information with regard to quarantine,  dangerous goods on board, ships' draft and matters relating to the ships' behaviour,  etc., and shall, on completion of pilotage and berthing or unberthing, complete and  sign the certificate on specified forms presented by the Pilot.
(4)
In the event of an outward bound vessel over-carrying a pilot outside the  limits of the Port, the master shall be bound to land the Pilot at the nearest Port and  shall be liable to pay all expenses incurred on this account.
(5)
Pilots shall be supplied with breakfast between 7 and 9 a.m., lunch between  noon and 2 p.m. and dinner between 6 and 8 p.m., Indian Standard Time, failing  which the Master shall pay compensation for food, namely Rs. 3 for any of the meals  missed by a Pilot.
(6)
The master of a vessel shall, in accordance with the provision of the Indian  Ports Act, 1908, display such signals as required by the Pilot to be used or as may be  directed by the Pilot.
(7)
The master of the vessel shall be responsible to take on board such equipment  as the Pilot may carry with him in the interest of pilotage of ships namely, R/T  equipment, Binoculars, Pilot's kit, etc.
(8)
Every ship entering or leaving the harbour shall be provided with the  following.
(a)
An efficient Pilot ladder to enable the Pilot to embark and disembark  with safety, which shall be of sufficient length to reach the water, when  the ship is in an unloaded condition and has no list, from the deck on  which it is intended that the Pilot shall embark and disembark.
(b)
A manrope of not less than 21/2 inches circumference on each side of the  ladder, the inboard and of the manrope being firmly secured to the  ship.
(c)
Means to enable the ladder to be used on each side of the ship and to  enable the Pilot to pass safely from the head of the ladder to the deck of  the ship.
(9)
Vessel shall not anchor within the Outer channel Fairway Buoys or within 4  cables length across the Entrance marked by the Outer channel Fairway Buoys or in  any other prohibited Anchorage as marked on Admiralty Chart 239 Approaches to  Vishakhapatnam Port, nor shall a master attempt to enter the channel to pick up a Pilot.
(10)
It will be incumbent upon the master of a vessel to avail of the service of the  Port tugs, while navigating within the Port limits.
(11)
In the event of a vessel parting her moorings whether secured to a jetty, quay  or buoys, it will be necessary to have an anchor ready for letting go, without delay,  and to be prepared to meet such an emergency with readiness and despatch as the  result of the parting of her moorings which may be serious.
(iii)
Notice regarding arrival of vessels
3.
 


Agents of all vessels expected to arrive in the port shall, at the earliest possible  moment, send to the Traffic Manager the following information :
(1)
Name of vessel.
(2)
Agent's name.
(3)
Date expected.
(4)
Net registered tonnage.
(5)
Tonnage and description of cargo to be landed.
(6)
Tonnage and description of cargo to be shipped.
(7)
Last Port of call.
(8)
Colours under which sailing.
(9)
"Estimated draft on arrival at Visakhapatnam Port." (Port Conservator's No. A 50 dated 28-3-50.).
(iv)
Berthing of vessels
4.
 


All vessels within the port shall take up such berths as may be assigned them  by the Port Conservator, and shall change their berths, or move when required by  him.
(v)
Rules to be followed by the Masters of vessels while in Harbour
5.
 Striking yards and masts.


- All vessels within post shall strike their yards and topmasts on being required to do so by the Port Conservator, whether by signal or otherwise.
6.
 Vessels taking in or discharging cargo, etc.


(a)
All vessels taking in or discharging ballast or any particular kind of cargo such as ammunition or other  xplosive, kerosene oil, bones, coral or other offensive articles and timber within the limits of the port shall do so only at such station as may be set apart from time to time by the Port Conservator.
(b)
No ballast, earth, ashes, stones, rubbish, waste material, filth, oil, ballast  water containing oil and bilge water shall be thrown, discharged, placed, put, emptied  or allowed to leak or flow or to fall from any vessel into any portion of the harbour  without the special permission of the Port Conservator.
7.
 Bunkering of vessels with liquid fuel.


- Bunkering of vessels with  petroleum, liquid fuel may be permitted at the quays by means of the service pipe  lines, provided that the following conditions shall be fulfilled :
(a)
During all such time as any vessel is receiving fuel into her bunkers, the  Master or First Mate of such vessel shall be present on board and it  shall be incumbent upon him to see that these rules are complied with  and that all reasonable precautions for safety are observed.
(b)
A ship's officer shall be on watch and an attendant shall be stationed  alongside the flexible connecting pipe while bunkering is in progress.
(c)
Suppliers of liquid fuel shall be responsible for seeing that all flexible pipes used for bunkering steamers are tested to a pressure of 100 lbs.  per square inch before operations commence and that all joints are oil-tight; that after the completion of each bunkering operation the port  section of the pipe line is cleared and that when flexible pipes are  dismantled any unavoidable spillage on the quay is properly .leaned  up with sand. Ship's officers in charge of vessels receiving bunkers  shall be responsible for seeing that all valves in ship's tanks or  connections are properly regulated to receive liquid fuel and due  warning shall always be given to suppliers by such officers before any  valves are closed to prevent the possibility of a sudden increase in  pressure which may cause a burst in the flexible pipe or elsewhere and  a consequent leakage of oil. Masters and owners of vessels receiving  liquid fuel and suppliers of liquid fuel for bunkering shall be personally  and severally responsible for seeing that bunkering operations are  conducted with cleanliness and in an orderly manner.
(d)
Suppliers of liquid fuel for bunkering shall be liable for any damage  whatsoever caused to cargo or property belonging to or in charge of the  Traffic Manager by any leakage of fuel oil due to or arising from  negligence or any defect in or failure of apparatus or appliances  belonging to the suppliers.
The master and owners or the agents of the vessel receiving such fuel  shall also be liable for any such damage if caused by negligence or  defect or failure of apparatus or appliances belonging to the steamer.
(e)
No cargo other than steel plates, iron rails and similar goods unaffected  by oil, shall be allowed on the wharf within 50 feet of the oil stand pipes  and shed doors immediately behind them shall be kept closed while  bunkering is in progress.
(f)
Before bunkering commences, the ship's attendant shall see that the  telephone connection to the Oil Company's Depot is in working order.
(g)
An attendant shall be on duty at the pump throughout the time of  bunkering.
(h)
At least two hours' notice in writing shall be given to the Port  Conservator before bunkering is commenced.
(i)
No bunkering shall be commenced unless a sand cart containing 15  cubic feet of sand is on the spot at the supply pipe.
8.
 Keeping free passages.


- The entrance to the harbour, the spaces between  the different mooring within the harbour, the turning basins and the spaces in the  vicinity of all piers, quays and harbour walls, shall be kept free to such extent as may  be required by the Port Conservator or by such other officers as may be appointed by  the said Conservator to act on his behalf.
9.
 Anchoring and mooring.


(a)
All vessels within the Port shall be anchored  or moored in such manner as may be directed by the Port Conservator.
(b)
The anchors of all steamers and square rigged vessels must be buoyed, and  care taken that the buoys "watch".
10.
 Moving and Warping.


(a)
All vessels within the port shall be moved or  warped from place to place as required and by such means or appliances as may be  ordered by the Port Conservator.
(b)
No vessel shall cast off a warp that has been made fast to her to assist a vessel  moving, without being required to do so by the Pilot or Harbour Master-in-charge of  the vessel moving.
(vi)
Regulations relating to use of Government piers and jetties, etc.
11.
 


The hours during which work may be carried on in each of the several  sections into which for traffic working purposes the port premises are divided, will  be notified by the Traffic Manager from time to time by means of notices posted in the  sections concerned, and no work shall be done, within the Port premises outside the  regular working hours so notified except with the permission in writing of the Traffic  Manager.
12.
 


Admission to the enclosed Port Premises shall ordinarily be regulated by  means of tickets, licenses or badges which shall on application be issued by the  Traffic Manager to such of the Public as have business to transact within the premises  in somewise connected with the purposes, services or works of the port.
12. 


-A.
No person shall, except under the authority of a written permit granted by  the Traffic Manager
(a)
have to carry with him a camera for taking photograph or any material  for making a sketch, plan, model or other devices;
(b)
take any photographs or make any sketch, plan or model of any movable  or immovable object or building or installation within any dock area.
Explanation. - For purposes of this rule, the expression "dock area" shall consist of the followings.
(i)
The Dry Dock area between the eastern and western boundary walls,
(ii)
The quay wall area enclosed by Customs boundary wall,
(iii)
The coal and oil wharves and jetties enclosed by barbed wire fencing,  and
(iv)
The eastern foreshore of the Turning Basin from the Southern Lighter  Canal to the Narrow Gauge Railway gate.
13.
 


Certain sites shall, from time to time, be set apart as occasion may require, by  order of the Traffic Manager at his discretion, to enable boatmen or coolies to obtain  their food and all persons bringing such food shall be restricted to these sites and the  pathways leading thereto, and therefrom, which shall be indicated by notice-boards.
14.
 


No goods shall be landed or shipped except at the places appointed by the  Traffic Manager, for each class of cargo.
15.
 


All floating timer discharged from vessels inside the port shall be properly  rafted and towed or floated into the timber pond.
16.
 


(a)
No package shall be opened upon the port premises by the importer or  owner for apportionment, examination or survey, without the permission of the Traffic  Manager. All workmen employed for opening packages on the port premises for  appraisement, examination or survey, shall be licensed by the Traffic Manager.
For the convenience of members of the public who have not secured the services  of a licensed Cooper the Port performs co-operage at the following rates :




 




Per
Package








 




Rs.
nP.










(1)
for opening and closing small packages not exceeding one cubic
foot in dimensions.




00.12








(2)
for opening and closing packages exceeding one cubic foot but not
exceeding 6 cubic feet in dimensions




00.25








(3)
for opening and closing packages exceeding 6 cubic feet but not
exceeding 16 cubic feet in dimensions




00.37








(4)
for opening and closing packages exceedingl6 cubic feet but not
exceeding 64 cubic feet in dimensions




00.75








(5)
for opening and closing packages exceeding 64 cubic feet but not
exceeding 154 cubic feet in dimensions




01.00








(6)
for opening and closing packages exceeding 154 cubic feet in
dimensions




02.00




(b)
Goods opened by order of the Customs Departments for examination or  appraisement or for survey at the request of the steamer agent or of the owners of the  goods, remain at the risk of the owner until, with the permission of the Custom Department  if opened for appraisement or for customs examination or at the written request of the  owner if opened for survey, they shall have been returned definitely to the Traffic Manager,  by the owner for custody and a receipt for them shall have been granted.
(c)
Goods opened for appraisement, examination or survey, which the owner  does not intend to return to the Traffic Manager as laid down in clause (b) above must  be removed from the port premises immediately after the appraisement, examination  or survey shall have been completed.
17.
 The Traffic Manager will not accept responsibility in respect of any package  containing a work of art or an article of vertu of which the value including that of  package exceeds Rs. 500, or containing specie, bullion, gold or silver articles, jewellery,  precious stones or coral, unless six hours at least before the package is landed or  shipped, written notice is given to the Traffic Manager, by the owner or consignee,  and the package is specially delivered to the Traffic Manager, and a receipt therefor  obtained. Should any package containing any of the articles above referred to be  brought to any wharf, quay in the possession or occupation of the Traffic Manager,  without written notice thereof as hereinbefore provided being given to the Traffic  Manager, the packages, if for export, shall be shipped or, if imported, shall be removed  to the Custom house or to the port sheds at the sole risk of the owner and shall remain  at his risk until cleared.
18.
 No person shall load or ship or attempt to load or ship or tender for loading  or shipment on or into any vessel within the port any package or object of which the  gross weight is one metric ton or more unless and until the gross weight of such  package or object has been plainly and durably marked upon it. If the exact gross  weight of any exceptional package or object is not available, such package or object  must be marked "Weight not more than ............" and the gross weight so marked must  not be less than the actual gross weight.


Licensing and regulation of boats. - See now Railway Boards Notification  No. S.R.O. 1019, dated 1st December, 1950, infra
Rules 19 to 59 [omitted.]
59.
 


-A. Repairs to vessels while in wet docks at Visakhapatnam Port. - If  any repairs are undertaken when a vessel is alongside a berth and in the course of  such repairs it becomes necessary to open any of the overside pipes, such pipes shall  be rendered safe by being blanked off. If an overside pipe cannot be blanked off and  rendered safe, then it shall not be opened up in the Port. The master or the Officer-in-Charge of the vessel and the owners of the vessel shall be held responsible for any  accident that may arise from neglect to take these precautions and for all liabilities  that may arise as a result of the accident.
(vii)
Use of fires and lights
60.
 (a) No vessel shall be fumigated except at a place appointed by the Port  Conservator for that purpose.


(b)
Pitch or dammer shall not be heated on board vessels within the port but in  a boat alongside or astern: nor shall spirits be drawn off on board such vessels by  candles or other unprotected artificial lights.
(c)
Vessels when loading or unloading cotton and/or jute shall have the hatch  coamings and steel works in the holds protected to prevent sparks from the impact of  chains, etc. and no smoking, naked lights or matches shall be allowed in or near the  holds where cotton, and/or jute is/are stowed.
(d)
When gunpowder, ammunition or other explosive in excess of 100 lb. weight  are being shipped on board or being discharged from any vessel within the limits of  the port, neither fires, lights nor smoking are under any circumstances to be permitted  on board.
61.
 (a) No person shall without permission previously obtained from the Traffic  Manager kindle or make use of a fire or a naked light on the quays or wharves, or in  any godown or enclosure or open space used for the time being for the storage of  goods within the port premises, and no person shall smoke in or near any such  godown or enclosure or open space.


(b)
No person shall smoke or use naked lights of any description on board a  barge or lighter, carrying cargo, and no fires shall be permitted on board such craft  except in stoves or fireplaces a regularly constructed for the purpose.
(viii)
Use of signals and signal lights
62.
 The master of any vessel arriving within the port with ammunition, explosives  other than fireworks, etc. forming part of the ships equipment of distress signals or  over 100 lb. in weight of gunpowder on board as cargo, shall display a red flag B of  the international code at the board as cargo, shall display a red flag B of the  international code at the fore during day-light, and between sunset and sunrise shall  exhibit, when at anchor, a red light at the force for such time as the ammunition,  explosives or gunpowder may be on board within port limits.


(ix)
Number of crew
63.
 All vessels within the port shall have on board a sufficient number of crew to  perform any duties which may become necessary for the safety of the vessel in regard  to veering or heaving in cable, bracing up the yards, striking masts and yards, etc, in  case of emergency arising.


(x)
Cleaning or painting vessels and cleaning bilges
64.
 No person shall be employed in cleaning or painting a vessel or in working  in the bilges, boilers or double bottom of a vessel in the port either before or after the  hours which may be fixed from time to time by the Port Conservator for such purposes.


(xi)
Employment of children
65.
 Children under 15 years of age shall not be employed within the limits of the  Port of Vishakhapatnam upon the handling of goods.


(xii)
Licensing of stevedores at the Port of Vishakhapatnam
65. 


-A. The Port Conservator shall, from year to year, issue licences to certain  approved firms and individuals, granting them permission to perform the work of  stevedoring vessels in the Port and no stevedore shall be allowed to work on board  any vessel in the Port unless he is holding such licence.
The Port Conservator may, after giving the licensee an opportunity of being  heard and for reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel or suspend any such licence.
On receipt of an application from a stevedoring firm for a licence to work in the  Vishakhapatnam Port, the licensing authority will inform the Stevedores Association  of the receipt of the application and invite objections, if any, to the grant of the licence.  If any objections are received, they will be considered on their merits. The decision of  the licensing authority will be final and no reasons can be demanded for granting or  not granting the licence. Every licensed stevedore shall engage labour only from a  pool or registered workers formed by the Port, unless no registered pool worker is  available.
65. 


-B. No licence to work in the Port shall be issued to any stevedore who shall  not undertake to employ, and every licensed stevedore shall have in his permanent  employment, such minimum staff as may be specified by the Port Authority from time  to time. At least one experienced Tindal shall be in charge of the work of each gang  working in each hold who shall supervise the loading or unloading including the  slinging or unslinging of cargo at each hatchway at which loading or unloading is  being carried on. It shall also be the duty of the Tindal when work is stopped for the  day or night to search and satisfy himself that no one is remaining in the hold.  Whenever a vessel is working cargo in the between-decks alone, it shall be the duty of  a supervisor or foreman to see that the between deck hatchways that are provided  with cross beams and fore and aft beams have all such beams fixed in their proper  places and that the hatches are properly put on before commencing work. The taking  off and putting on the beams and hatches shall not be done except under the  supervision of supervisor or foreman who shall also see that persons keep out of  danger on deck and do not stand under any hoist. A signalman shall be posted on  deck to see that the crane chain is not taken out of the square of the hatchway and that  the hook does not catch the coamings.
65. 


-C. Cargo shall not be discharged, loaded or shifted in any vessel in the Port  except under the directions and superintendence on board such vessel of the Master  or owner of the vessel or of a stevedore licensed by the Port Conservator to perform  such word in the Port.



