



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


The Hindu Inheritance (Removal Of Disabilities) Act, 1928





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


The Hindu Inheritance (Removal Of Disabilities) Act, 1928


Act 12 of 1928





            Published in Gazette 12 on 20 September 1928
          



            Assented to on 20 September 1928
          



              
                Commenced on 20 September 1928
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 20 September 1928.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






The Hindu Inheritance (Removal Of Disabilities) Act, 1928
ACT NO.12 OF 1928
[20th September, 1928]
An Act to amend the Hindu Law relating to exclusion from inheritance of certain classes of heirs, and to remove certain doubts.
WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Hindu Law relating to exclusion from existence of certain classes of heirs, and to remove certain doubts; It is hereby enacted as follows:
1.
 Short title, extent and commencement. -


(1)
This Act may be called the Hindu Inheritance (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 1928.
(2)
It extends to the whole of India , except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3)
It shall not apply to any person governed by the Dayabhaga School of Hindu Law.
2.
 Persons not to be excluded from inheritance or rights in joint family property. -


Notwithstanding any rule of Hindu law or custom to the contrary, no person governed by the Hindu law, other than a person who is and has been from birth a lunatic or idiot, shall be excluded from any right or share in joint family property by reason only of any disease deformity or physical or mental defect.
3.
 Saving and exception. -


Nothing contained in this Act shall affect any right which has accrued or any liability which has been incurred before the commencement thereof, or shall be deemed to confer upon any person any right in respect of any religious office or service or of the management of any religious or charitable trust which he would not have had if this Act had not been passed.



