



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849



Rule ADMIRALTY-OFFENCES-COLONIAL-ACT-1849 of 1849





            Published on 1 August 1849
          



              
                Commenced on 1 August 1849
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 1 August 1849.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849
12.
 & 13 VICT., C. 96
1373.
 


[1st August, 1849]
An Act to provide for the Prosecution and Trial in Her Majesty's Colonies of Offences committed within  the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.
[Preamble.- Repealed by 54 and 55 Vict., C. 67.]
1.
 Trial of Admiralty offences in colonies.-


[* * *] 
[Introductory words were repealed by 54 and 55 Vict., C. 67.]
 If any person within any  colony shall be charged with the commission of any treason, piracy, felony, robbery,  murder, conspiracy, or other offence of what nature or kind soever, committed upon  the sea, or in any haven, river,creek, or place where the admiral or admirals have  power, authority, or jurisdiction, or if any person charged with the commission of any such  offence upon the sea or in any such haven, river, creek or place shall be brought for trial to any  colony, then and in every such case all magistrates, justices of the peace, public prosecutors,  juries, judges, courts, public officers, and other persons in such colony shall have and exercise,  the same jurisdiction and authorities for inquiring of, trying, hearing, determining and adjudging  such offences, and, they are hereby respectively authorised, empowered, and required to institute and carry on all such proceedings for the bringing of such person so charged as aforesaid  to trial, and for and auxiliary to and consequent upon, the trial of any such person for any such  offence; wherewith he may be charged as aforesaid as by the law of such colony would and  ought to have been had and exercised or instituted and carried on by them respectively if such  offence had been committed and such person had been charged with having committed the  same, upon any waters situate within the limits of any such colony, and within the limits of the  local jurisdiction of the Courts of Criminal justice of such colony.
2.
 


[Repealed by 54 and 55, Vict., C. 67.]
3.
 Provision, etc., where death in the colony, or at sea, etc., follows from injuries  inflicted on the sea, etc. -


[* * *] 
[Introductory words were repealed by 54 and 55 Vict., C. 67.]
 Where any person shall die in any colony of any stroke,  poisoning, or hurt, such person having been feloniously stricken, poisoned, or hurt upon the  sea or in any haven, creek, or place where the admiral or admirals have power, authority, or  jurisdiction, or at any place out of such colony, every offence committed in respect of any such  case, whether the same shall amount to the offence of murder or of man slaughter, or of being  accessory before the fact to murder, or after the fact to murder or manslaughter, may be dealt  with, inquired of, tried, determined, and punished in such colony, in the same manner and in  all respects as if such offence had been wholly committed in that colony :
and if any person in any colony shall be charged with any such offence as aforesaid in  respect of the death of any person who, having been feloniously stricken, poisoned or other-wise hurt, shall have died of such stroke, poisoning, or hurt, upon the sea, or in any haven,  river, creek or place where the admiral or admirals have power, authority or jurisdiction, such  offence shall be held for the purpose of this Act to have been wholly committed upon the sea.
4.
 


[Omitted as being inapplicable to India.]
5.
 Interpretation of "colony".-


[* * *] 
[Introductory words were repealed by 54 and 55 Vict., c. 67.]
 For the purposes of this Act the word "colony"  shall mean any island, plantation, colony, dominion, fort or factory of Her Majesty, except any  island within the United Kingdom and the Islands of Man, Guernsey, Jersey, Alderney and Sark, and the lands adjacent thereto respectively [* * *] 
[And includes British India; see 23 and 24 Vict., c. 88, Section 1, page 22a]
.
6.
 


[Repealed by 41 and 42 Vict., c. 79.]



