



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


The Port Rules for the Port of Bombay





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


The Port Rules for the Port of Bombay


Rule THE-PORT-RULES-FOR-THE-PORT-OF-BOMBAY of 1925





            Published on 19 January 1925
          



              
                Commenced on 19 January 1925
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 19 January 1925.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






The Port Rules for the Port of Bombay
2046.
 


Notification No. 441 /42-M, dated 19th January, 1925. - In exercise of the powers conferred by Sec. 6, sub-sections (1) and (1-A) of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 (
15 of 1908
), and in supersession of Government Notification, Marine Department No. 834, dated the 12th November, 1912, and of Government Notification, Marine Department No. 27, dated the 19th September, 1922, in so far as it relates to the Port of Bombay, the Governor in Council is pleased to make the following rules, namely :
Chapter I
For the purpose of these rules, the Docks Channels are bounded as follows:


Prince's And Victoria Docks
On the North. - By a line drawn through two transit poles surmounted by cones fixed on the east and west sides of the Prince's Dock and continued to the eastward.
On the East - By the each side of Cross Island in transit with the Dolphin Rock Lighthouse.
On the South - By a line drawn from the steps about 600 feet South of Victoria Dock, entrance to the North Channel Beacon, thence on a line with the North Channel beacon in transit the Prince's Dock Island Tower.
On the West - From the steps about 600 feet south of Victoria Dock entrance to the north transit line or about 450 feet north of Prince's Dock Island Tower.
Centre - By two transit poles surmounted by discs.
Indira Dock
On the North - By a line from the northern pier head of Indira Dock for 800 feet to a red buoy marking the end of the dam and thence towards the black buoy marking the south end of Cross Island Reef.
The expression" the port" means the "Port of Bombay."
Vessels entering or leaving or being moored in Port
1.
 


Pilots shall take vessels to sea from clear berths or bring them into port only on rights when the lights are visible and reasonably distant objects discernible.
2.
 


Vessels arriving without a pilot shall anchor to the eastward of the Sunk Rock
Lighthouse.
2. 


-A.
Scrap cinema and Camera films other than those of cellulose, acetate or other safety base shall not be permitted to be brought within the limits of the Port unless they are packed in sealed iron or steel drums.
3.
 


Vessel under way shall have both bower anchor and cables clear and ready for use if required.
3. 


-A.
When a vessel is in pilotage charge on ladder either accommodation or pilot should be lowered except with the consent of the Pilot.
3. 


-B.
All vessels shall keep clear of vessels about to enter or leaving the I.N. Docks whilst they are to the Westward of Middle Ground Island and are exhibiting a Black Ball at the yard arm.
Berths, Stations & Anchorages in Port
4.
 


All vessels within the port shall be bound to takeup such berths as may be appointed for them by the Deputy Conservator and shall change their berths when required by that authority.
5.
 


The area hereinafter defined shall be reserved in the port as an anchorage for yachts and no vessels other than yachts and small passenger boats shall pass within such limits:
On the North - By a line drawn from No. 3 Government slip to the north end of Middle Ground.
On the South - By that portion of a line drawn from the south end of Apollo Bunder parraler to the northern limit contained between the eastern and western limits.
On the East - By a line drawn from centre of Cross Island to west side of Oyster Rock.
On the West - By a line drawn from North Channel Beacon to end of Arthur Bunder.
Striking Masts and Yards, etc.
6.
 


Vessels moored within the port shall have their jib-booms rigged in, and shall, when ordered by the Deputy Conservator or any of his Assistants, strike their masts or yards Signals made from the Port Signal Station directing the striking of masts or yards shall be accepted as orders and be obeyed.
Removal and Placing of Anchors, etc.
7.
 


Anchors shall not be allowed to remain cock billed and square spares shall not be allowed to hang alongside or astern of vessels.
Vessel taking in particular Cargoes
8.
 


Vessels taking in or discharging ballast or any kind of cargo, within the port, shall be bound to take up such berths as the Deputy Conservator may direct.
9.
 


Vessels when not working cargo at night shall have all open hatchways protected by stout nettings.
Keeping Free Passages
10.
 


Free passage shall be kept to all piers, jetties, landing places, wharves, quays, docks, moorings and other works and all vessles and boats shall be bound to move, when required, to clear such passages.
11.
 


A clear, space, at least 30 yards (27.43M) in width, shall be preserved in front of all landing places.
12.
 


Boats, whether ship's boats, or boats playing for fire, shall not lay alongside any of the press or landing places longer than is actually necessary to embark or land passengers and their baggage, etc., but will anchor or lay off at a distance of at least 30 yards (27.43M) from such pier or landing place, in order that the approaches thereto may not be obstructed.
13.
 


Rafts of timber made fast to vessels shall not be allowed to extend more than one hundred feet (30.48M) from the stern, or more than fifty feet (15.24M) from the sides of such vessels.
14.
 


Vessels and boats approaching or passing dredgers and hopper barges exhibiting the "not under control" signal shall give such dredgers and hopper barges a wide berth and shall avoid all interference with their operations.
15.
 


Every ocean going vessel or tug towing an ocean-going when passing through the Docks Channels shall sound the steam whistle at short intervals as a warning to other vessles to get out of the way, and a vessel at anchor in the stream shall do likewise when getting under way, and it shall be duty of all such other vessels to see that a free passage is preserved through the Docks Channels for every such ocean-going vessel or tug towing an ocean going vessel.
16.
 


When the Dock-Gates are open a large red signal ball by day, and three red lights one above the other by night. shall be exhibited at the Prince's or Victoria Dock flagstaffs as warning to vessels to keep clear of ocean-going and other vessels navigating the Docks Channels.
17.
 


Rafts of timber shall not be warped, floated or moved, in any way across the Docks Channels at any time when the Dock Gates are open or when the blue flag is hoisted at the Dock.
18.
 


Free passages shall be kept throughout the fairways and the Channels within the Port of the due width of the navigable water, and fishing stakes and nets shall only be placed under the following conditions and shall not be placed outside the areas comprised within the following boundaries:
Rules as to Fishing Stakes
(i)
Every fishing stake shall be of a sufficient length to project not less than 9 feet (2.74M) above the level of high water, extraordinary spring tides.
(ii)
The upper end of each stake shall be surmounted by a basket or other conspicuous contrivance.
Rules as to Moored Nets
(iii)
Fishing nets attracted to buoys shall not be laid down within the limits of the port outside the areas hereinafter defined.
Rules as to Drift Fishing
(iv)
Draft or any other description of net-fishing shall not be pursued in the airway of the deep water Channels within the port.
Areas to which Fishing Stakes and Fishing Nets are restricted
(v)
Fishing stakes and fishing nets are to be confined to the following areas, which are closed to navigation but in no case will fishing be allowed or boats be permitted to ride within 20 feet (16M) of any of the buoys marking navigable channels.
The buoys specially laid to mark the fishing areas are liable to be with drawn during the foul season, from 25th May to 30th September.
(1)
Off the land of Thull.
That area comprehended between the maintained of Thull and the following boundary line.
On the North and East. - From a buoy placed at the intersection of the lines Butcher Island Tree in transit with Trombay Ruin and the line of Prongs Light House and the North end of Kansa Island, to the North Point of Kansa Island and from thence along the West shore of Kansa Inland to the South Point, thereof, from thence along a straight line to Kunkeshwar Peak to where it crosses the East Port limit and from thence the East Port limit to the foreshore near Thull Knob.
On the West. - From the buoy marking the Western end of the North Limit along the line of Butcher Island Tree in transit with Trombay Ruinto the point where it intersects the line of Thull Knob Beacon in transit with North Pap Beacon and from that point South (True) to the West Point of Undari Island.
On the South. - Along the South Port Limit from the South Point of Undari Island to the maintained.
This area is liable to restriction to conform to the exigencies of the defence of the port and is required to be cleared of craft as necessary during Heavy gun practice.
(2)
Off Karanja Island
That area comprehended between the shore of the Island of Karanja and the following boundary lines viz:
On the North. - A straight line drawn from North Karanja Buoy through Uran Beacon to Shewa Beacon.
On the West. - From North Karanja buoy along a straight line drawn to the Spoil Ground Light Buoy to a buoy placed at the point where Karanja Beacon is in transit with the boundary pillar on the North end of Karanja Island and from thence to Karanja Beacon, from thence South along an extended line drawn through Green Island and Karanja Beacon to a position with Sunk Rock Light-house in transit Old Lookout Tower at Colaba, from therence W.N.W. along the line of sunk Rock Light-house and Old Lookout Tower, to a buoy placed at the point where this line of the Spoil Ground Light Buoy and South Karanja Buoy and from thence to South Karanja Buoy.
On the South. - A straight line drawn from South Karanja Buoy to a position on the East Port Limit where the boundary pillar on the South end of Karanja bears 49 distant 5 cables in 10 feet L.W.O.S.T.
This area is liable to restriction to conform the exigencies of the deference of the port and is required to be cleared to craft a necessary during heavy gun practice.
The area of the Spoil Depositing Ground marked by buoys, as from time to time required, is to be kept clear and all fishing is prohibited therein.
(3)
Off Trombay Island.
that area comprehended between the following boundaries.
On the North. - Such of the foreshore of the Island to Trombay as lies within Port Limits and from the S.Wcorner of the Island to the boundary pillar on the North side of the mouth of Kharup Creek.
On the East. - The East Port Limit.
On the South. - A Straight line drawn from the south end of the pier at Trombay to the extreme South end of Trombay Island close to Pir Pau tomb, and from thence along a straight line to the most Easterly corner of the Sewree Reclamation, to a point where the west boundary limit cuts the line.
On the West. - A straight line drawn South (True) through the boundary pillar situated near the mouth of Kharup Creek, to the South Limit.
Note. - In the event of development in this area, fishing will be prohibited without compensation over such part of whole area, as may be required by the Trustees of the Port of Bombay.
(4)
Off Colaba.
(a)
That area comprehended within the following boundary lines.
On the North. - A straight line drawn from the Dolphin Rock Lighthouse is the North Colaba Beacon.
On the East. - A straight line drawn from the Dolphin Rock Lighthouse to the Sunk Rock Lighthouse.
On the South. - A straight line drawn due East from the South Colaba Beacon until it meets the line drawn from the Dolphin Rock Lighthouse to the Sunk Rock Light house.
On the West. - A straight line drawn from North to South Colaba Beacon.
(b)
That area comprehended between the shore and the following boundary lines.
On the North. - From the shore to a position, a distance of about 3 cables along a straight line drawn from the Observatory Anemometer Dome to the Sunk Rock Lighthouse and thence to the South end of the Oyster Rock along the line Prongs Lighthouse and the South end of Oyster Rock and from the north point of Oyster Rock on an extended line drawn form the end of the Pier at Pilot Bunder through the North end for Oyster Rock of about 4 cables to the East Limit.
On the East. - A straight line drawn from the Dolphin Rock Lighthouse to the Sunk Rock Lighthouse, and thence a straight line from the Sunk Rock Lighthouse to the Prongs Reef Buoy.
On the South. - A straight line drawn West (True) from the Prongs Reef Buoy to the line of Thull Knob Beacon in transit with the North Pap Beacon and thence along that transit line to the West Port Limit.
The Northern boundary Westward of the Prongs Lighthouse is subject to rights acquired by the Development Department.
This area is liable to restriction to conform to the exigencies of the defence of the port and is required to be cleared of crafts as necessary during heavy gun practice.
(5)
Off Elephanta Island
That area comprehended between the foreshore of the Island and the following boundary lines:
On the North and West. - A straight line extended from the Dolphin Rock Lighthouse through the South point of Butcher Island.
On the East. - A straight line drawn from the South end of the pier at Trombay to the Barnacle Beacon and thence a straight line to the south point of Elephanta Island.
On the South and West. - A straight line drawn from Green Island to the South point of Elephanta Island.
(6)
Off Butcher Island
That area comprehended between Low Water Mark on the foreshore of the Island and the following boundary lines:
On the North. - The extension of line which passes through north point of Hog Island and Elephanta Reef Buoy.
On the East. - That much of the line of Trombay Ruin and the North end of Butcher Island Pier as lies between the North boundary and the North end of Butcher Island Pier. From the South end of Butcher Island Pier to Butcher Beacon.
On the South. - A straight line drawn from Butcher Beacon to Tucker Beacon.
On the West. - From the line of the North limit along a straight line drawn from the Nort-West Butcher Buoy to the West Butcher Buoy, and thence a straight line to the Western fishing stake of the group situated with Tucker Beacon and North Tucker Beacon in transit and Prince's Dock Clock Tower in transit with the Dock Master's Officer Building, and from the said Western fishing stake a straight line to Tucker Beacon.
The shore of Butcher Island down to low water spring tide mark is subject to military control and on the foreshore, of the Island fishing without special licence is prohibited.
Regulation of Anchoring, Mooring, etc.
19.
 


All vessels within the port shall moor and unmoor or anchor in accordance with the orders of the Deputy Conservator.
20.
 


Vessels shall not anchor within that portion of the bounded as follows:-
On the North. - By a line drawn from the extreme Northern point of Kundary (Kennery) Island to the Patch of isolated rock situated near and the North-eastward thereof, and thence to the South brow of Kunkeshver Hill.
On the East. - By the line of coast extending along the foreshore from apoint due west of the south brow of Kunkeshvar Hill to the boundary mark erected on the beach close to the fishing village of Navagam at the mouth of a creek about two miles to the south of the south brow of Kunkeshvar Hill.
On the South. - By a line drawn westward from the boundary mark above referred to through the southern extreme of Undari Island to the Beacon to the eastward of Kundari (Kennery) Island and thence to the south extreme of the latter, and the west by the easter shore line of Kundari (Kennery) Island.
21.
 


Vessels, when moored in port, shall have not less than 60 fathoms on each cable and shall keep clear hawse.
22.
 


Vessels, when moored or at anchor, shall have ranges of both cables on deck ready to be veered immediately if required.
23.
 


Vessels at single anchor shall have a second anchor ready to let go; and while laid up in the stream sight their anchor every three weeks.
Regulation of Moving and Warping
24.
 


All vessles within the port shall be moved or warped from place to place as required and by such means or appliance as may be ordered by the Deputy Conservator.
25.
 


A vessel shall not cast off any warp made fast to her in order to assist the mooring of another vessel without permission from the pilot charge of such other vessel.
26.
 


Masters of vessels, entering or leaving the Docks, shall be responsible for the maintenance of sufficient pressure of steam to work their engines at full speed, ahead or astern as may be required until such time as their vessels are breathed in Dock or are clear of the Docks Channels.
Regulation of the use of Mooring Buoys, etc.
27.
 


No vessels belonging to private owners shall motor at a buoy or take up any of the anchorages west of Middle Ground without the permission of the Flag Officer, Indian Navy, Bombay.
Regulation of Cargo, Passenger, and other Boats, etc.
28.
 


Cargo boats, laden or empty, in more than two tiers of two in each tier shall not be permitted to hang astern of any vessels without the permission of the Deputy Conservator.
29.
 


The master or other person in charge of any vessel, at anchor or moored in the port, shall not allow more than ten cargo or other boats to be made fast to such vessel.
30.
 


Boats, whilst under way or at anchor, shall observe the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea.
31.
 


When two boats, one propelled by sails and the other by oars, are proceeding on a course which, if continued, will involve risk of collision, the boat propelled by oars shall keep out of the way of the other, but the boat under sail shall use every precaution to avoid accident and, if necessary, shall alter her course.
32.
 


Tugs, when not towing, launches and all boats propelled by steam or other mechanical power shall keep out of the way of all boats not so propelled.
33.
 


Tugs, launches and all vessels, however propelled, shall carry and show the regulation lights and shapes and make the regulation sound signals as prescribed in the International Regulation for Preventing Collisions at Sea.
34.
 


Tugs, launches and all vessels, propelled by steam or other mechanical means shall be steered from forward of the centre of the vessel, except small motor launches or steam cutters which may be steered from after. In all cases the helmsman shall be so placed that he may command a clear look-out ahead.
35.
 


Licensed boats shall, on all occasions, when it may be practicable, give way to boats belonging to vessels of war or private owners.
Regulation of the use of Fires and Lights
36.
 


Fire shall not be allowed on board any boat lying within 30 yards (45.72m) of the Dockyard staris or wharves or within 50 yards (45.72m) of the wharf in the basin formed within the breakwater in the vicinity of the Custom House Bunder or of any of the Docks or Dry Docks in the port.
37.
 


Pitch may be heated in the boats alongside or astern of vessels import; it must, under no circumstances, be heated on board such vessels.
38.
 


Unprotected lights shall not be allowed in the hold between deck or other cargo compartment of vessels in port loading or discharging cotton or raw jute. Cooking by open signrees in open boats loaded with cotton or raw jute is prohibited.
39.
 


Spirits, oil, paints, spirits of turpentine and all inflammable substances shall be stored on board vessels in port in a place of security.
40.
 


Vessels requiring to be steamed shall be moored below the Middle Ground clear of the shipping.
Enforcement and Regulation of the use of Signal
41.
 


All vessels of whatever rig or denomination, when under way or at anchor in port, shall exhibit the lights as prescribed in International Regulations for preventing collisions at Sea.
42.
 


Whittles or sirens shall not be sounded on board any tug launch or other vessels within 200 yards (182.88 m) of any quay, or landing place in port except for the purpose of giving warning of proximity or approach to any other vessel.
43.
 


Dredgers at work laying out chains or not under control, and hopper barges similarly employed in attendance on such dredgres and not under control, shall carry the regulations signals.
44.
 


A steam or other vessel, when employed in towing a target, shall by day show from her mast-head a square red flag and from one of her yard-arms two red globes of spherical shapes abreast of each other, the shapes being each at least four feet in diameter. Such vessel, when similarly employed, shall by night show a red light in place of the flag at her mast-head and two red lights in place of globes or shapes at either yard-arm in addition to her usual mast-head and side lights. All vessels shall give such vessel a wide berth and avoid passing under her stern or between her and the target.
45.
 


Whenever a fire occurs on board any vessel within the limits of the Port or whenever any vessel within such limits is in distress, or requires assistance from other vessels or from the shore, the signals shown in the following Code of Signals shall be hoisted. Overheating or smouldering of coal or other cargo in holds or bunkers is to be immediately reported by letter or in person to the Deputy Conservator, and no vessel in this condition may be taken into Dock without the permission of that Officer.
46.
 


The following Code of Signals is prescribed for use in the port and such signals, as may be required and necessary, shall be hoisted, displayed and observed as the case may be, by the masters of all vessels in port. In any instance where the particular position of the signal to be used by the master of a vessel entering or leaving the port, or whilst in pilotage charge is not specified, the master shall hoist or display the signal in such position as the pilot in charge shall direct.
Code of Signal
Signals hoisted at the Port Signal Station to be observed by vessels lying in, entering or leaving the port.
Note. - To call up the port Signal, vessels shall hoist the Signal Z of the International Code by day, or flash the letter Z by night.




Flags


Meaning








(1)
Sgaure white flag with blue cross and blue ball in centre, hoisted
at the north or south yard according to bearing.






(1)
A steamer in sight.










(2)
As above if hoisted in conjunction with a distinguishing flag
[Items 3 to 14-Omitted]






(2)
Denotes the Company to which the vessel belongs.










(15)
Black Ball.






(15)
A vessel is about to enter IN. Docks.










(16)
Two Black Balls in a vertical line.






(16)
A vessel is leaving I.N. Docks.










(18)
Ensign over flag N at the maimast-head.






(18)
A vessel is entering the port with horses on board.






Quarantine






(20)
By Day Flag Q meaning






"My
Ship is healthy and I request free pratique".










Flag
QQ






"My
ship is suspected".










Flag
QL






"My
ship is infected".










Flag
QQ






"Monkeys
on board".










Tackline
M




 








Flag
QQ /QL






"Infectedc
or suspected ships permitted to come alongside".










and
QUZ




 








Flag
PUV






"Pilgrim
vessel."








(21)By Night


 








A
red light over a white light, the light being not more than six
feet apart.






I
have not received free Pratique.






Explosives






By
day






By
Night










(22)
A square red flag at the fore truck to remain flying until
expolsive have the been discharged






(22)
A red light at the force truck to remain hoisted until explosive
have been discharged.








Dangerous
Petroleum








By
day






By
night










(23)
A red flag not less than 3 feet square with a white circular
centre six inches in diameter and the International Code signal
R.K.O. to remain flying until the vessel receives Gas-free
certificate.






A
red light at the force to remain hoisted until the vessel is
certified Gas-free.








Non-dangerous
Petroleum








A
red flag not less than 3 feet square hoisted and the
International Code Signal R.K.O. to remain flying until the
vessel receive a Gas-certificate. [Items 24 to 26 Omitted.]






A
red light at the force to remain until the vessel is certified
Gas-free.








Exemption
or Special Coasting Pilot's Signals








(27)
1st substitute over X flag of the at International Code to be
hoisted on under way. approaching the pilot station and while
under way.






Two
lights red over white to be hoisted the Pilot station and while








Note.- The signals as at (27) should be hoisted also when leaving'the
Port.






Vessels
for Dock








(28)
pilots flag over draft of water in






While
light over a red light 6 feet paet such position that they cannot
be mistaken for Rule of the Road Lights.








Police
Assistance








(29)
S.T. of the International Code at white the main.
[Items
30 to 33 Omitted.]






(29)
Three lights-white, red, hoisted vertically six feet apart, at
the main.








Bombay Dock Signals
(34)
Signals to the Docks by Vessels Entering Dock by day. - Vessels going direct into dock on arrival should, in addition to hoisting the vessel's name hoist as soon as possible a signal denoting the vessel's draft of water at the foremast; this signal to remain hoisted until the Pilot receives an order by signal or other means that the vessel will not dock that tide. Hauling the signal down is an intimation to the Dock Master that the vessel will not dock that tide. The draft is to be expressed by hoisting the Pilot flag over the numeral pennants of the International Code correspnding to the number representing the vessel's draft e.g.
Pilot's flag over numeral pennat Nos. 1, 2=12' draft
Pilot's flag over numeral pennat No. 1, 2,6=12'6" draft.
(35)
Pilot of vessels bound to the Docks should, when the "Come On" signal is given form the Docks, acknowledge this signal by hoisting the answering pennat close up and sounding three short and one long (V) blasts on the vessels whistle.
Signals from the Docks to Vessels Entering Dock by Day
(36)
A red ball at Prince's or Victoria Dock exhibited close up under the yard indicates gates open, and at the Indira, Dock the lock is open for barge traffic.
(37)
A blue flag hoisted at the mast-head at either Dock indicates that the Dock Channel is to be kept clear.
(38)
If, after having been hoisted at the mast-head, the blue flag is lowered to half-mast height, it indicates that the Dock Channel need not be kept clear for at least half an hour.
(39)
If, after being hoisted, the blue flag is hauled down, it indicates that the Dock Channel will not be required unless other vessels arrive.
(40)
A pilot's distinguishing signal hoisted half way up to the yardarm indicates that the vessel on which the pilot may be is to be made ready to enter the Dock Channel.
(41)
A pilot Signal hoisted close up to the yard-arm, indicates that the vessel on which the pilot may be is immediately to enter the Dock Channel and proceed towards the dock, when the channel is clear of outward bound vessels, if any.
(42)
If, after having been hoisted up to the yard-arm, the pilot's signal lowered half wat down and kept there, it indicates that the vessel is to stop, and not proceed further towards the Dock, unless the Pilot's signal is again hoisted close up when the vessel shall continue hewer course into Dock.
(43)
If, after being hoisted close up to the yard-arm, and afterwards lowered half-down, the pilot's signal is entirely hauled down, it indicates that the vessel is to proceed out of the Dock Channel, and will not be received into Dock that tide, unless the vessel is again signalled to at the south yard-arm.
(44)
Pilot's distinguishing signal will generally be hoisted.
(45)
A pilot's flag hoisted half-way up at the north yard-arm, indicates that the vessel is to be kept north.
(46)
A pilot's flag hoisted right up at the north yard-arm indicates that the vessel will be taken into Dock stern first.
By Night
(47)
A red flare exhibited at the Prince's or Victoria Dock or a red light at the Indira Dock pier heads signifes danger, and that vessel coming onto the Dock should stop and go out of the Dock Channel.
Three red lights hoisted vertically at the uard-arm at Prince's and Victoria Docks indicate that the Dock Gates are open.
At Princes Dock and Victoria Dock
(48)
-(49) The "Come On" signal for a vessel to enter dock at night will be morsed to the vessel concerned from the dock. At Prince's and Victoria Docks the "Come on" signal will be sent from either the Dock Master's chowki at Victoria Dock entrance or the flag staff on the Island Tower. The position from which this signal is sent will not indicate the dock to which the vessel is to proceed. The pilot will already have this information on the Pilot Order.
(50)
At Indira Dock the "Come On" Signal will be sent from the Port Signal Station at Ballard Piror.
At Pir Pao Oil Pier
(51)
A Red Flag by day or red Light by night exhibited at the Flagstaff near the landing place at Pir Pao Oil Pier indicates that the ship alongside is actually loading or discharging dangerous petroleum.
While this signal is exhibited no steam launch or vessel with fires or smoking on board is allowed alongside the ship or the Pier.
Distress Signals
(52)
Whenever a fire occurs on board any vessel within the limits of the Port, such vessel shall immediately hoist by day the two flag signals D.Q. of the International Code, and by night two red lights in a vertical line one over the other not less than 6 feet apart where they can best be seen from the Port Signal Station, at the same time sending D.Q. by Morse flashing lamp to the Port Signal Station.
(53)
Whenever any vessel within the limits of the Port is in distress or requires assistance from other vessels or from the shore such vessel shall make the following signals:
By Day
Either :
a gun or other explosive signal fire at intervals of about a minute.
Or a continuous sounding with any fog signal apparatus.
Together with:
either the International Code signal of distress indicated by N.C.
or the distant signal consisiting of a square flag having either above or below it a ball or anything resembling a ball.
By Night
Either :
a gun or other explosive signal fired at intervals of about a minute. or a continuous sounding with any fog signal apparatus.
Together with:
either flames on the vessel (as from a burning tar barrel, oil barrel, etc.) or rockets or shells throwing stars of any colour or description, fired one at a time at short intervals.
(54)
All other signals may be made in accordance with the International Code.
Bombay Storm Warning Signals
(55)
The following Storm Warning Signals will be displayed by day and right at the undermentioned places, viz:
(1)
The Port Signal Station.
(2)
The big flagstaff situated between Prince's and Victoria Dock.
(3)
The flagstaff at the Port trust Workshops at Mazagon.
(4)
The flagstaff at Chowpatty.
(5)
Worli Fort.
General System
The Meteorological Department will keep Port Officers informed of the latest information with respect to all disturbances and ships officers should apply to them for details to supplement the indication of the signals displayed.




(a)
Diatant Signals






THESE
INDICATE DANGER TO WHICH SHIPS MAY BE EXPOSED AFTER THEY HAVE
LEFT THE HARBOUR








I.
CAUTONARY- There is a regim of squally weather in which a
storm may be forming




Day


Night








Note.- This signal is hoisted at Ports so situated with reference to
the disturbed weather that a ship leaving the port might run into
danger during its voyage.




 


 








II.
WARNING- A Storm formed.
Note:-This
signal is hoisted when there is no immediate danger of the port
it se1f being affected, but ships leaving the port might run into
the storm.




 


 






(b)
Local Signals






THESE
INDICATE THAT THE PORT ITSELF AND THE SHIPS IN IT ARE THREATENED








III.
CAUTIONARY.- The port is threatened by squally weather.




 


 








IV.
WARNING.- The port is threatened by a storm, but it does not
appear that the danger is an yet sufficiently great to justify
extreme measures of precautions.




 


 








Note.-The existence of a storm can often be determined before its
direction of motion can be fixed. In this case all those Ports
which the storm could possibly strike are warned by the signal.




 


 








V.
DANGER.- The port will experience severe weather from a
storm, of slight or moderate intensity that is expected to cross
the coast to the south of the port (or to the east, in the case
of Verava1, the Hooghly Port, Diamond Island, Bassein, Rangoon
and Port Blair).




 


 








VI.
DANGER.- The port will experience severe weather form a
storm, of slight or moderate intensity, that is expected to cross
the coast to the north of the port (or to the west in the case of
the Hooghly Port, chittagong, Rangoon, Moulmcin, Karachi and Port
Blair).




 


 








VII.
DANGER.- The port will experience severe weather from a
storm of slight or moderate intensity, that is expected to cross
over or near to the port.




 


 








VIII.
GREAT DANGER-The pot will experience severe weather from a
stores of great intensity that is expected to cross the coast to
the south of the port (or to the east in the case of Veraval, the
Hooghly Port. Diamond Island, Bassein, Rangoon and Port Blair).




 


 








IX.
GREAT DANGER- The port will experience severe weather from a
storm of great intensity, that is expected cross the coast to
the north of the port (or to the west in the case of the Hooghly
Port, Chittagong, Rangoon, Moulmein, Karachi and Port Blair).




 


 








X
GREAT DANCER.-The port will experience severe weather from a
storm of great intensity, that is expected to cross over or near
to the port.




 


 








XI.
FAILURE OF COMMUNICATIONS.- with the meteorological
warning, centre have broken down, and the local officer considered
that there is danger of bad weather.




 


 






Regulation of Number of Crew
47.
 


All vessels afloat within the port shall have on board a sufficient number of crew to perform any duties which may become necessary for the safety of the vessel in regard to veering or heaving in cable, bracing up yards, striking mast and yards, etc., in case of emergency arising.
Regulation of the Employment of Persons Engaged in Cleaning Vessels, etc.
48.
 


Masters of vessels shall not send any person or persons into bilges or other confined spaces on board their vessels until such necessary precautions, as are laid down in the subjoined directions and extract from the Admiralty Regulations, shall have been taken:
Direction
(a)
Unless proper precautions are taken, persons sent down to scrape the bilge of vessels, may lose their lives through asphyxia from the inhalation of mephitic gas. The masters of vessels are, therefore, directed to guard against accidents by pumping water in and out of the bilges opening the manole doors (under proper precautions) so as to ventilate the bilges, and by such other means as may be necessary in each particular case, and they are to prevent persons from entering the bilges until these precautions have been taken. The particular attention of masters of vessels is drawn to the above directions, as well as the advisability of telling off some competent persons to see that no one enters the bilges until the bilge-water has been pumped out and that the tindals in charge of boys who are to work in the bilge properly carry out all orders given to them in this respect. The pumping out of bilge water will not be permitted in the docks.
48. 


-A.
The owner, master or any person in charge of a vessel in the port or on the break-up hard shall not allow the breaking of such vessel or the commencement of any repairs involving the use of naked lights, gas cutting or welding apparatus to or in the vicinity of the fuel storage tanks or the fuel system or involving the entry of any person into any fuel storage tank of any such vessel wherein petroleum may have been deposited unless such owner, master or other person in charge of the vessel has obtained a vapour-free certificate from the Chemical Examiner, Customs House, Bombay.
(b)
Extract From Admiralty Regulations Men Cleaning And Coating Double Bottoms
(1229)
The following precautions are to be observed while men are engaged in cleaning and coating the double bottoms of an iron ship:
(a)
The air fan with hose is to be freely used for pumping in fresh air before the men are sent down and while they are at work.
(b)
A leading stoker is to be responsible under the Engineer-in-charge of the party that no man enters a compartment unless a light has been held in and left at the bottom of the compartment for at least five minutes, to ascertain the purity of the air.
(c)
Still greater caution is required when the compartment has only one exit.
(d)
Communication is always to be kept up between the men in the inner compartment and those who have access to the outer air end.
(e)
The men are to be warned that they should leave a compartment immediately the light begins to burn dimly; a candle is to be supplied to each party as a surer test than a lamp, since it might be thought that a lamp burnt dimply for want of trimming.
The same precautions are to be taken when examining Boilers and Bunkers.
Employment of Children
49.
 


No persons shall employ children under 12 years of age, upon the handling of goods at piers, jetties landing places, wharves, quays, docks, warehouses or sheds within the limits of the port.
Regulations as to Petroleum
50.
 


The master or other person, for the time being, in command or in charge of every vessel or boat engaged in taking in or discharging petroleum or having petroleum on board shall take effectual measures for preventing the escape be leakage or other means of such petroleum from any such vessel or boat.
51.
 Rules Relating to the Control of Vessels in the Port of Bombay Carrying Petroleum and to the Transport, Discharge Loading of Petroleum in the Port.
Part I – General Rules


1. For the purpose of these rules


(a)
"Part" means a part of these rules.
(b)
"The Trustees" means the Trustees of the Port of Bombay.
(c)
"Petroleum" means any liquid hydrocarbon or mixture of hydrocarbons, and any inflammable mixture (liquid viscous or solid) containing any liquid hydrocarbon, but it does not include any oil ordinarily used for lubricating purposes and having its flashing point at or above two numbered degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer.
(d)
"Certificated Petroleum" means petroleum certified to be nondangerous petroleum by a certificate of such description as the Governor in Council may, from time to time by written order, prescribe, granted at the port of shipment.
(e)
"Dangerous Petroleum" mean petroleum having its flashing point below seventy six degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer.
(f)
"Fuel Oil" means petroleum having flash point of not less than 150 °F. and ordinarily used as fuel in engines or furnaces.
(g)
"Petroleum in Bulk" means petroleum in quantities exceeding 500 gallons contained in any one receptable.
(h)
"General Guarantee" means a gurantee in the form printed as Appendix "A".
(i)
"Vessel" includes anything made for the conveyance by water of human beings or property.
(j)
"Bulk Oil Vessel" means a vessel licensed to carry petroleum in bulk as cargo.
(k)
"Country Craft" means small sailing vessels such as pattimars battellas, cotais, baglas and fore and aft sqaure rigged vessels of under 300 tons net register, which carry cargo to or from Indian Ports, but does not include craft licensed to carry cargo in the port of Bombay such as cargo boats or barges.
(i)
"Cargo Boat" means a vessel licensed under section 79 of the Sea Customs Act (8 of 1878) to land and ship merchandise in the port.
(m)
"port" means and includes every portion of the Port of Bombay.
(n)
"Deputy Conservator" means Deputy Conservator or other officer duly appointed by the Trustees to administer the provisions of the Port Rules, or any person having authority to act in such capacity.
(o)
"Owner" means the Owner, Agent or Master of Bulk Oil Vessel, or the owner or Agent of the petroleum, as the case may require.
(p)
"Docks By-laws" means by-laws framed by the Trustees for the regulation and management of the Dock of Bombay Port Trust, made under the provisions of section 73 of Act 
6 of 1879
 (the Bombay Port Trust Act, 1879).
2. Nothing in these rules shall apply to a bulk oil vessel granted a Gas Free Certificate by the Inspector of Explosives or the Assistant Inspector of Explosives West Circle Bombay or any other officer appointed in this behalf by Government which has not carried petroleum since such certificate was issued.
3. With the exception of Rules 5,8 and 10 of this Part noting contained in these rules shall apply to vessels carrying or loading fuel oil as bunkets, provided that the Docks By-laws are complied with and that the fuel storage tanks and installation comply with the Regulations on the subject and that not other petroleum is carried except in small quantity as ship's stores.
4. Nothing in Parts II, III or V of these rules shall apply to vessels carrying fuel oil which has a flash point of not less than 150°F unless the vessel carries or has carried other petroleum in bulk since obtaining a Gas Free Certificate.
5. Bunkering of vessels with fuel oil in the Port by means of cargo boats will be permitted provided that


(a)
The cargo boats used conform to the specification in Appendix "B" to these rules and have been approved and licensed by the Deputy Conservator.
(b)
No smoking, cooking, naked light or forges shall be allowed in the cargo boat while pumping is in progress.
(c)
A suitable gutter or other contrivance shall be placed under the connecting service pipe to prevent any oil or oily water from leaking into the Port.
(d)
The bilges of an oil cargo boat shall not be pumped when such cargo boat is in any confined waters or is alongside any bulk oil ship or tug.
(e)
The cargo boats shall carry an ample supply of buckets of sand.
6. Vessels which do not enter the Bombay Port Trust Docks or are unable to berth alongside the Oil Berths at Indira Dock Harbour Wall will be permitted, in special cases, to bunker in the Harbour with fuel oil from bulk oil steamers on application to the Trustees through the Deputy Conservator, provided a gurantee is given by the Owner of the bulk oil steamer supplying the bunkers and also by the Owner of the steamer receiving bunkers, indemnifying the Trustee from all damage and cost in respect of all accidents and injuries to any person or property caused by or during the harbour bunkering of any vessel or vessels.


Such indemnity shall extend to the officers and servants of the Trustees.
7. The Master of every vessel carrying petroleum other than fuel oil shall, on nearing the Harbour and during the time that such ship remains in the Harbour, display by day a Red Flag and by night a Red Light, at the foremast-head or where it can best be seen but not less than 20 feet above the deck, in addition to any aviation lights which may be required by any other Regulations, Rules or By-laws.
8. The Master of every vessel carrying petroleum shall, on entering the Port deliver to the Pilot before reaching Sunk Rock Light-house a written declaration over his signature stating


(a)
What quantity of petroleum the vessel is carrying
(b)
Whether any and, if so, what quantity of it is "dangerous petroleum."
(c)
Whether any and, if so, what quantity of it is "Certificated petroleum."
(d)
Whether any and, if so, what quantity of it is petroleum having a flash point of not less than 150 °F.
(e)
What quantity of petroleum [specifying whether any and, if so, what part of it belongs to each of the classes (b), (c), (d)] it is intended to land at this Port or at any other Port in India :
Provided that no such declaration by the Master of the vessel shall be necessary if, in anticipation of her arrival, the Agent for the vessel delivers to the Deputy Conservator a written declaration as aforesaid over his signature, or in the case of fuel oil carried as fuel for the vessel, that it is covered by a General Guarantee in accordance with Appendix "A" field in the Port Trust Office.
9. If any petroleum to be landed at Bombay or any Port in India be certificated petroleum the Master or Agent or the vessel in which it is carried shall deliver to the Pilot or Deputy Conservator, as the case may be, along with his declaration the certificate relating to such Petroleum, unless such certificate shall previously has been forwarded direct from the Port of shipment.
10. Every certificate and declaration delivered to a Pilot under Rules 8 and 9 above shall be made over by him without delay to the Deputy Conservator and all certificates, and declarations received by the Deputy Conservator, shall with all conveninet despatch, be forwarded by him to the Chief Customs Officer.
11. Every vessel having petroleum other than fuel oil in board as cargo whilst moored in the Port shall keep the end of a wire hawser having an eye, paid out to the water's edge at the bow and stern to enable a tug to take hold in case of emergency, and in the case of a vessel lying at the Pir Pao Oil Pier she shall, in addition, have securely shackled to her bower cable on offshore mooring, if any when consideed necessary by the Deputy Conservator.
12. Every vessel having petroleum other than fuel oil on board as cargo when discharging or loading or while hatches are open shall have her fire hoses connected and all fire extinguishing appliances ready for immediate use and if the petroleum being loaded or discharged or stowed in the holds in dangerous petroleum, all awnings shall be furled. No smoking shall be allowed on board and no other vessels with lights or fires or persons smoking on board shall be allowed within the hundred yards' of a vessel loading or discharging dangerous petroleum.
13. No bulk oil vessel carrying petroleum or fuel oil for discharging shall be taken alongside the wharf or into dock until permission to discharge the same has been received from the Chief Customs Officer.
14. No fire or naked lights (except fires in the galley and boiler-rooms and electric light) shall be allowed on board any bulk oil vessel when in the Port until the vessel has been cleansed inside from petroleum and vapour of petroleum, and if loading or discharing dangerous petroleum, the conditions laid down in Part II of these Rules must be complied with.
15. Every bulk oil vessel shall be breathed half a mile east of the shipping in the Port and, if carrying dangerous petroleum, in the special anchorage set apart for dangerous petroleum, until taken alongside a wharf to discharge and also, after discharging the petroleum, until the vessel is cleansed or proceeds direct to sea, provided that a bulk oil vessel, on completion of the discharge of all dangerous petroleum in excess of 20 gallons retained in ship's stores, may be placed alongside an oil berth at the Harbour Wall to bunker or to discharge or load general cargo in accordance with the provisions of the Dock By-laws or her Master certifying that all tanks which contained dangerous petroleum have been steamed out and ventilated and that the hatches of all such tanks are closed down gas-tight.
16. The Master of every bulk oil vessel shall observe the following precautions regarding oil tanks, namely:


(1)
So long as there is petroleum, or dangerous vapour in a tank, he shall keep the hatches of such tank, and the manholes or other apertures to such tanks, locked or otherwise fastended in a manner satisfactory to the Deputy Conservator, provided that, subject to the provisions of clause (2) of this Rules, he may cause them to be opened for the purpose of taking on board or discharing petroleum per cleaning the tanks or for other sufficient reason.
(2)
He shall not allow any person to enter a petroleum tank unless:
(a)
such person wears safety helmet of a description approved by the Government; or
(b)
the Inspector of Explosives or the Assistant Inspector of Explosives, West Circle, Bombay or any other officer appointed in this behalf by Government, having examined the tank with aid of a vapour testing instrument, has certified it to be free from dangerous vapour.
17. During the time that any bulk oil vessel is in the Port a responsible officer and engineer must always be on board night and day to carry out and give effect to the provisions of these Rules. In the absence of the Master, the responsible officer is the senior deck officer on board. When loading or discharging is proceeding or about to be started, it is absolutely essential that the Master or Chief Officer and either the Chief or Second Engineer must be on board and see that every necessary precaution is taken for the safety of the vessel and her cargo, and during all such time the engines, boilers and machinery shall be maintained in working order so that the vessel may be moved (in case of a vessel loading or discharging Dangerous petroleum as soon as steam can be raised) if so required by the Deputy Conservator.
18. If so required by the Deputy Conservator a bulk oil vessel alongside an oil berth shall at any time and from time to time be removed to the anchorage appointed for bulk oil vessel and when the petroleum has been discharged, the vessel shall, as soon as possible, leave the oil berth and be taken to the appointed anchorage and remain there till cleansed, unless she is proceeding to sea; provided that if she has discharged her petroleum cargo she may, with permission from the Deputy Conservator, cleanse her tanks alongside the oil berth, due precautions being taken to prevent the discharge of oil, oily water or refuse onto the shore or into the Harbour.
19. No bulk oil vessel shall be taken amongst the other shipping unless proceeding to an oil berth (or in the case of a vessel carrying fuel oil only, into dock) until her Master produces a certificate from the Inspector of Explosives or the Assistant Inspector of Explosives, West Circle, Bombay, or any other officer, appointed in this behalf by Government that he has examined the tank with the aid of a vapour-testing instrument and that the vessel has been found entirely clear of petroleum and vapour of petroleum and is in a fit state to enter dock. All bulk oil vessels proceeding to dry dock must produce such a certificate :


Provided that a bulk oil vessel which has not carried petroleum of a flash point below 150 IF since her last gas-free certificate was granted and which is entering Dry Dock for the purpose of hull painting and examination only, will be admitted into Dry Dock on a certificate issued by the Master of the vessel stating that the tanks have been properly cleaned out. If after entry into Dry Dock it should transpire that the vessel requires more extensive repair a gas-free certificate singed by the said Inspector of Explosives, Assistant Inspector of Explosives or other officer appointed by Government in this behalf must be produced before such repairs shall be started.
20. Vessels having on board petrol in quantities which are reasonably necessary for use with emergency dynamos and emergency wireless transmitters and other domestic requirements will be permitted to proceed to any anchorage.
21. Any vessel, having petroleum, (dangerous or non-dangerous or both) in bulk on board for discharge partly at the Port of Bombay, and partly at a Port or Ports other than Bombay, may proceed to the special berth allotted for the purpose of discharge of petroleum in bulk without having first temporarily discharged the petroleum in bulk carried by her for the Port or Ports other than Bombay, but dangerous petroleum for the other Port or Ports shall not in any circumstances without the special permission of the Deputy Conservator be moved from the tank or tanks containing it or be opened up for any purpose whatsoever.
22. When petroleum is discharged or loaded in bulk, its removal from or to the vessel shall be effected by means of a hose and metal pipe suitable and prepared for the purpose, and it shall be-pumped into storage tanks. Except in the case of the dangerous petroleum and in cases where discharge is interrupted to shift berth in accordance with orders from the competent authority the discharge or loading of petroleum in bulk shall be continuous, day and night, until completed weather and appliances permitting. In the case of dangerous petroleum, discharging or loading may be continuous day and night, but provisions of Part II of these rules shall be strictly observed.
23. When pumping petroleum at night, electric light only shall be used; and when the vessel has finished discharging or loading dangerous petroleum by the vessel's pumps flushing water at least as far as the boost degrees F., the pipe to the storage tanks shall immediately be emptied of petroleum by the vessel's pumps flushing water at least as far as the boosting pump on shore. If for any cause the discharging or loading of petroleum is at any time suspended, arrangement must be made by means of a valve for effectually preventing any of the oil left in the pipe from escaping.
24. A bulk oil vessel having on board only non-dangerous petroleum, shall be permitted to discharge under its own power.
24. 


-I. A bulk oil vessel, while discharging non-dangerous petroleum, shall be permitted simultaneously to load and unload general cargo in accordance with the provisions of the Docks By-laws if the vessel be breathed at the Harbour Wall.
25. A bulk oil vessel shall be permitted to discharge dangerous petroleum under its own power subject to the conditions laid down in Part II of these rules.
25. 


-I. A bulk oil vessel, when carrying but not while discharging or loading dangerous petroleum, may load or unload cargo, provided that
(a)
the vessel is breathed at Pir Pao Oil Jetty or in the special anchorage set apart for the purpose; and
(b)
the Master certifies in writing that the general cargo hold is separated from the oil space by an isolating cofferdam and no tank lids whatever are open; also that the general cargo hold has been thoroughly ventilated and rendered free from inflammable vapour.
26. (a) A bulk oil vessel will not be permitted to berth for the purpose of discharging bulk petroleum through the Trustees' pipe line unless the consignees furnish a certificate to the Deputy Conservator that they have at their disposal sufficient licensed tank storage capacity available to accommodate the total quantities of the individual petroleum products manifested for discharge at Bombay. The particular licensed tank storage into which the bulk oil is to be discharged and the capacity available must be specified and the quantities to be discharged must be stated on the certificate.


Should it appear to the Trustees' Chief Engineer, during the course of discharge, that for any reasons particular licensed tank storage capacity is insufficient to accommodate the quantities manifested to this Port, he may stop the vessel discharging through the trustees' pipe lines and the vessel will be liable to be removed from the berth at the discretion of the Deputy Conservator in respect of vessel berthed at Pir Pao and by the Docks Manager in respect of vessels berthed at the Harbour Wall. 1 (b) A bulk oil vessel berthed at Pir Pao Pier or at any of the Indira Dock harbour Wall.Berths or "K" Berth, Prince's Dock for the purpose of discharging petroleum, shall discharge such cargo with due diligence, i.e. at rates not less than the following:-
If berh ted a t Pir Pao Pier
Kerosene through the 8" pipe line, 93 tons per hour.
Kerosene through the 10 pipe line 140 tons per hour
Petrol through the 10" pipe line when using ship's power, 130 tons per hour.
Petrol through the 10" pipe line when using shore steam, 100 tons per hour.
If berthed at "K" Berth, Prince's Dock-
Fuel Oil and Diesel Oil, 86 tons per hour.
If berthed at Indira Dock Harbour Wall Berths:-
Kerosene through the 8" pipe line, 73 tons per hour.
Fuel Oil through the 8" pipe line, 90 tons per hour.
Fuel Oil through the 10" pipe line, 120 tons per hour.
Failure to discharge these cargoes at the above rates will render the vessel liable to be removed from the berth at the discretion of the Deputy Conservator in respect of vessels berthed at Pir Pao and by the Docks Manager in respect of vessels berthed in the Docks or at the Harbour Walls.
Note. - Stoppage of discharge under Rule 26(a) or (b) of Part I of these rules will not relieve the Master of the vessel from flushing of the pipe in accordance with Rule 23 of Part I of these rules.
27. When petroleum other than fuel oil imported otherwise than in bulk is landed, it shall be landed either at berths provided for the purpose or in cargo boats and except where electric ligh is exclusively used only after sunrise and before sunset, and only at such place or places or the Deputy Conservator shall direct, subject to any customs notification that may, for the time being, be in force; provided that where cargo boats are untilised the conditions and precautions prescribed in Part IV of these rules shall be observed.
28. Petroleum may be transhipped from one vessel to another for conveyance to any other Port, whether within or beyond the limits of India provided that the petroleum shall not be transhipped between sunset and sunrise, except when electric light is exclusively used, and provided further` that the precautions laid down in Part IV of these rules shall be observed, and that dangerous petroleum whether in bulk or otherwise, shall not be transhipped under any circumstances between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
29. Subject to the preceding Rules and to the Docks By-laws, nothing in these rules shall prohibit the entry into the wet docks of any vessel carrying fuel oil in bulk when the Master or Agent for the vessel produces a certificate in the form hereto annexed, to the effect that the fuel oil so carried has its flashing point not less than 150°F by approved test:


Provided that if the vessel has recently carried petroleum of a flash point below 150°F in any tank without having such tank certified gas free, these Rules shall apply until the vessel has been properly cleansed and is entirely clear of petroleum and vapour of petroleum and certificate in regard thereto required by Rule 19 of this Part has been produced.
Form of Certificate
(1)
Quantity of fuel oil in vessel.
(2)
Description of oil.
(3)
Specific gravity of oil.
(4)
Number of samples taken.
(5)
Flash point by approved test.
(6)
Signature of Officer making above test.
(7)
Vice of Government Officer or Consul or signature of the Company's Chief Resident Chemist and the countersignature of the General Manager of the local refinery of works.
30. No steamer carrying inflammable cargo other than petroleum and its products shall, while within the Port, tow a cargo boat carrying petroleum in bulk.
31. No steamer towing a cargo boat carrying petroleum in bulk shall, while within the Port, at the same time tow any other cargo boat carrying inflammable cargo other than petroleum and its products.
32. Rules 30 and 31 of this Part shall not apply to fuel oil.
33. Nothing in these Rules shall entitle any vessel to a lien on a particular berth.
Part II – Special Rules Relating To Bulk Oil Vessles Discharging Or Loading Dangerous Petroleum Within The Harbour


1. Before any dangerous petroleum is landed or loaded, the Owner shall give due notice to the Deputy Conservator.
2. Except as provided in rule 28 in Part I of these Rules, dangerous petroleum in bulk shall only be loaded or discharged at Pir Pao Oil Pier.
3. Before any dangerous petroleum contained in casks, barrles or other containers is landed, the holds of a bulk oil vessel having on board such containers shall be thoroughly ventilated and after all dangerous petroleum has been removed from any bulk oil vessel, the holds and tanks shall be rendered free from inflammable vapour:


Provided that this Rules shall not be deemed to require to be free from inflammable vapour the tanks of a bulk oil vessel which leaves the Harbour without delay after the discharge of dangerous petroleum.
4. (a) Dangerous petroleum may be discharged by day or night, subject to the provisions of Part II, Rule 6, but such discharge must commence not less than one hour before sunset and should anything occur during such discharge after sunset to necessaitate a repair to the plant, pipes or connections or to interfere in any way with the uninterrupted discharge of the dangerous petroleum such discharge shall be discontinued until after sunrise.


(b)
Bulk oil vessels which conform to the requirements of Appendix "C" to these rules shall be permitted to discharge by stem from their own boilers or by internal combustion engines placed in a position remote from cargo holds and pump rooms but bulk oil vessles not so conforming shall discharge by means of steam from the boiler on the Pier. This steam shall not be used except for pumping dangerous petroleum.
(c)
In bulk oil vessles conforming with Appendix "C" and having the cargo pump driven by electric motor, the electric motor must be of approved design and its connections shall be isolated from the cargo pump by a gastight bulk head of sufficient height to preclude the possibility of inflammable vapour entering the motor compartment. A gas-tight gland shall be fitted where the driving shaft passes through the bulkhead.
Note. - Before any bulk oil vessel is permitted to discharge dangerous petroleum under its own power as mentioned in rule 4 above special permission must be obtained from the Port Authority {through the Deputy Conservator).
5. In the event of it being necessary to interrupt pumping in order to raise steam on board, the oil pipes in the vicinity of the vessel shall be flushed with water and the valve on the Pier Head shall be closed before the boiler fires are lighted.
6. The use of electric power while loading or dischring dangerous petroleum is not permitted unless the vessel's electric installation complies with Lloyds or other approved Society's requirements for electric fittings for ships carrying oil having a flash point less than 150°F.
7. Every vessel discharging dangerous petroleum shall be fitted with a by-pass valve on the discharge side of the pump having a connection back to the ship's tanks.
8. From the time when the holds or tanks of a bulk oil vessel are first opened for the purpose of loading or landing dangerous petroleum until such time as a dangerous petroleum shall have been loaded into or removed from such holds or tanks and the holds or tanks shall have been securely closed down and, in the case of landing rendered free from inflammable vapour as required by this rule, there shall be no fire or artificial light on board such ship or at or near the place where the dangerous petroleum is being loaded or landed :


Provided that this rule does not prohibted boiler fires in the case of vessles conforming to their requirements of Appendix "C" of these Rules.
And provided that this Rule shall not prevent the use of lamps, heaters, cookers, or other similar type of safe apparatus, electric or otherwise, so designed contracted and maintained as to be incapable of igniting inflammable vapour.
9. The owner shall take adequate steps to prevent any person under his control from smoking at or near the place where dangerous petroleum is being landed or loaded and to prevent any person engaged in such landing or loading from carrying fuses, matches, or any appliances whatsoever for producing ignition.
10. No dangerous petroleum contained in casks, barrles or other vessels shall be landed or loaded unless such vessels are staunch and free from leakage, and are of such strength and construction as not to be liable be broken or to leak, except in case of gross carelessness or extraordinary accident.
11. All pipes and other appliances used in the landing or loading of dangerous petroleum in bulk shall be free from leakage.
12. When the landing or loading of dangerous petroleum has been commenced such landing or loading shall be proceeded with, with due diligence (see rule 26 Part I), and if it is discontinued the tanks and holds of the petroleum ship shall immediately be closed.
13. No dangerous petroleum contained in casks, barrels, or other vessels shall be landed at any quay until the ship or carriage by which the same is.to be removed therefrom shall be at the place in readings to receive the same, and all dangerous petroleum landed shall be forthwith removed therefrom or to some duly licensed place of storage.
14. No dangerous petroleum shall be brought to the place of loading until the petroleum ship into which it is to be loaded is in readiness to receive the same.
15. No dangerous petroleum shall be discharged or allowed to escape into the waters of the Harbour.
16. The Master or Owner shall take all due precautions for the prevention of accident by fire in landing or loading dangerous petroleum.
17. Iron or steel hammers or other instruments capable of causing a spark shall not be used for the purpose of opening or closing the hatches or tank lids of a petroleum ship, nor shall the chipping of iron rust or paint be carried on in the vicinity.


Fires and lights not to be used on Quay. - Fires and lights other than electric filament lamps, and/or self-contained electric lamps, heaters, cookers or other similar type of safe apparatus, so designed, constructed and maintained as to be incapable of igniting inflammable vapour, shall not be used upon the quay upon which dangerous petroleum is being landed or loaded, or upon which dangerous petroleum is lying.
Red Flag or Red Light exhibited on Pir Pao Pier. - Whilst a bulk oil vessel is actually engaged in discharging or loading dangerous petroleum or cleansing her tanks or venting vapour from opened tanks at Pir Pao Oil Pier a Red Flag by day or a Red Light by night will be exhibited on the flagstaff near the landing steps.
No steam launch or vessel having fires, lights or persons smoking on board shall be allowed within 100 yards of such vessles or alongside the Pier while this signal is exhibited.
Distance between ships. - Two or more petroleum ships shall not, except for purpose of transhipment, lie within 100 feet of one another unless in the opinion of the Deputy Conservator it is impracticable to maintain such distance.
Superintendence. - For the safer loading and unloading of dangerous petroleum and for the prevention of accident by fire or explosion the Deputy Conservator may appoint a person to superintend and enforce the observance of these rules during the discharge or loading of dangerous petroleum and the Owner of the vessel shall be liable to pay to the Trust the reasonable expenses of such superintendence. Such superintendence shall not attach any legal liability to or constitute the acknowledgement by the Trustees that the Rules have been observed and shall not release the owner or Master of the vessel from responsibility for failing to observe the Rules.
Inspection - The Owner, shall, when so required by the Deputy Conservator, or other official authorized by the Port Authority, afford every reasonable facility to enable such official to ascertain whether these rules are duly observed.
Note - Watch.-Attention is invited to rule 17 of Part I of these Rules.
Part III – Special Rules Relating To Vessels Carrying Petroleum Other Than Bulk Oil Vessels, Country Craft And Cargo Boats


1. Vessels arriving in Port with, or loading or discharging dangerous petroleum in tins, metal barrels or other containers, shall be anchored in the Dangerous Petroleum Anchorage.
2. Vessels shall not load or discharge dangerous petroleum in tins, metal barrels or other containers except between the horse of sunrise and sunset.
3. Vessels arriving in Port, with or loading or discharing non-dangerous petroleum in tins, metal barrels ore other containers shall be anchored in such place as the Deputy Conservator may direct.
4. General cargo and non-dangerous petroleum in tins, metal barrels or other containers may be loaded or discharged simultaneously provided that they are contained in separate holds, but during the loading or discharge of dangerous petroleum no other cargo shall be loaded or discharged.
5. Under certain conditions as governed by the Docks By-laws vessels having non-dangerous petroleum in tins, etc., and general cargo on board may be allotted berths at the Harbour Walls of the Docks where, in addition to the provisions of the said Docks-By-laws, the following precautions must be strictly observed :


(i)
That when general cargo is being loaded or discharged, the hatches or compartments in which non-dangerous petroleum is carried, are kept securely closed and vice-versa.
(ii)
That special arrangements to maintain a thoroughly efficient watch and ward are made by the ship and all necessary precautions against fire and smoking are strictly observed whilst the vessel is at the wharf berths.
(iii)
Every care is taken to safeguard the ships at the adjoining berths.
6. Vessels may load or discharge non-dangerous petroleum in tins, metal barrles or other containers between the hours of sunset and sunrise, provided that no lights of any description other than electric lights are used either on board the vessel or any cargo boat alongside.
7. Subject to the provisions of the Docks By-laws vessels which have discharged dangerous or non-dangerous petroleum in tins, metal barrles or other containers, shall not be transported from the anchorage at which such discharge took place to the Dock or Harbour Wall Berths until the Master has certified in writing that the holds from which such dangerous or non-dangerous petroleum was discharged are free of petroleum and petroleum vapour. The Trustees, however, reserve the right to be furnished with further certificate issued by the Inspector of Explosives or the Assistant Inspector of Explosive, West Circle, Bombay or any other officer appointed in this behalf by Government that the holds or compartments in question are free of petroleum and petroleum vapour and that in his opinion the vessel is in a fit state to enter dock or come alongside a Harbour Wall Berth.


Note. - See rules 7,11 and 12 of Part I of these Rules which also apply.
Part IV – Special Rules Relating To Cargo Boats


1. No fire or light of any description other than lights required by the Port Rules or any detonating article or substance whatsoever or matches, shall be allowed on board any cargo boat while being used for the transport of or when loading or discharing dangerous petroleum.
2. No cargo boat used for carrying of dangerous petroleum shall be fitted with a caboose for cooking purposes when engaged in such work.
3. Dangerous and non-dangerous petroleum shall not be transported at the same time on a cargo boat unless the containers for non-dangerous petroleum are of the same type prescribed for dangerous petroleum as laid down in rule 27 of the petroleum Rules, 1937. In the case of dangerous and non-dangerous petroleum being transported at the same time on a cargo boat in accordance with the condition prescribed above, non-dangerous petroleum shall be treated as dangerous petroleum.
4. Leaky tins containing dangerous petroleum shall not be loaded into a cargo boat containing sound tins.
5. The bilges of every cargo boat which has carried a cargo of petroleum shall, immediately after the cargo boat has been unloaded, the thoroughly cleared of all traces of such petroleum and dried and the holds shall be thoroughly ventilated, provided that in the case of a cargo boat specially constructed and employed in carrying petroleum in bulk this precaution shall not be necessary until the cargo boat has completed its work on the whole consignment of petroleum which it has been engaged to carry.
6. Cargo boat into which dangerous petroleum has been loaded from any vessel or wharf shall not be permitted to leave from alongside such vessel or wharf except during day-light and not later than a time which will enable the cargo boat to arrive before sunset at the place at which the dangerous petroleum is to be discharged.
7. Every cargo boat having any quantity of dangerous petroleum or other petroleum in bulk on board shall exhibit from sunrise to sunset a large square red flag from a mast not less than 15 feet above the deck.
8. The hatches of every cargo boat having dangerous petroleum on board shall be and remain battened down and covered with tarpaulins at all. times save when actually loading or discharging petroleum.
9. Every cargo boat, other than a motor-propelled cargo, boat, having dangerous petroleum on board shall be transported by a tug, and if steam be the motive power of such tug, her funnel top or tops shall be fitted with efficient spark arresters.
10. All towing hawsers shall be made of steel wire or chain and the scope between the stern of the tug and the stem of the nearest tow to her shall not be less than 100 feet.
11. No dangerous petroleum shall be loaded into or transported in cargo boats other than those complying in all respects with the requirements laid down in Appendix "D" to these rules, and approved by the Deputy Conservator.
12. Cargo boats used for the carriage of dangerous petroleum may be propelled by motors fitted to such cargo boats provided (a) that such cargo boats are built in accordance with recognised rules for ship-building, such as Lloyd's Rules or those of the British Corporation, and under the supervision of a responsible surveyor; (b) that the propelling power is situated in the after part of the vessel, the compartment in which it is fitted being separated from the hold used for cargo by a cofferdam extending the full width of the vessel the hold used for cargo by a cofferdam extending the full width of the vessel and of one frame space in length; (c) that the propelling power is sufficient to enable the vessel to traverse the distance from the lodgings to the discharging station within two hours and under ordinary conditions of weather; and (d) that such cargo boats comply with the requirements of Appendix "D" to these rules and are approved by the Deputy Conservator.
13. Petroleum other than dangerous Petroleum in bulk shall be transported in a cargo boat which complies with the specification laid down in Appendix "B" to these rules duly licensed for such service and has been approved by the Deputy Conservator.
Part V – Special Rules Relating To The Carriage Of Dangerous Petroleum In Country Craft


1. Dangerous petroleum may be transported from Bombay by country craft in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
2. Every country craft with dangerous petroleum on board shall, whilst in the Port, exhibit where it can best be seen, a red flag.
3. The dangerous petroleum shall be carried either in (1) 40 gallon steel barrels the screw bungs of which are well fitted and sealed or (2) the usual 2 gallon sealed tins of petrol companies or other containers approved by the authorities or (3) 4 gallon sealed drums. In the case of (1) the barrels shall be loaded with the bungs upwards. In the case of (2) not more than 4 tiers of such tins shall be carried on a vessel. In the case of (3) not more than 3 tiers of such drums, which shall be loaded on their ends with bungs upwards shall be carried on a vessel. The barrels or tins or drums shall be so packed, and dunnage of suitable material as approved by the Port Trust Authorities so inserted as to ensure close storage and prevent any shifting of the receptacles during transit. The barrels or tins or drums shall not be placed within 4 feet of the after-deck.
4. The quantity transported in a single vessel shall not exceed the licensed carrying capacity of the vessel taking into account the weight of the barrels or tins in which the dangerous petroleum is carried. When the dangerous petroleum is carried in 40 gallon steel barrles, five full barrels shall be taken to constitute a ton.
5. All barrels or tins shall be carefully examined and no leaky barrels or tins shall be shipped.
6. Loading shall be done under the supervision of the Harbour police and shall only be allowed between sunrise and sunset and at such places as may be notified for the purpose.
7. No fire or naked light of any description or smoking shall be allowed on any part of the vessel during the loading or discharging of dangerous petroleum or while lying alongside a wharf.
8. No fire or naked light of any description or smoking shall be allowed on any part of the vessel during the transport of dangerous petroleum except on the small after-deck which shall be enclosed by a solid barrier reaching upto within six inches of the gunwale.
9. No inflammable cargo shall be carried at the same time as dangerous petroleum.
10. Buckets containing sand shall be placed at convenient points on the craft and not less than two such buckets shall be placed on the after-deck.
11. Country craft loaded with dangerous petroleum shall not leave their loading berth except during daylight and with written permission from the Port Trust Authorities which shall not be granted unless there is reasonable probability that the craft will be clear of the shipping in the Port before sunset. No such craft shall anchor within half a mile of other shipping in the Port unless compelled by stress of weather or accident.


Appendix "A" To Rule 51
(Vide Definition and rule 8, Part I)
Form of General Guarantee
To
The Trustees Of The Port Of Bombay
To
We being| OwnersAgents of Owners


S.S. " "
of the.......................................................do hereby declare and warrant that
Line of Steamships known as
terms of the bunkering contract (s) for the said| S.S." "Line of Steamships| the oil


suppliers have been and are bound to supply to the said| ShipLine of Steamships


fuel oil of all of which the flash point is in all cases at or above 150 Fahrenheit and that no fuel oil except that supplied under the above mentioned
contract (s) has been utilised for bunkering the said| ShipLine of Ship.


This guarantee is a general guarantee and shall continue in force until expressly revoked by us in writing.
Dated this day of......19
Appendix "B" To Rule 51
Specification for Cargo Boats intended for the carriage of petroleum other than dangerous petroleum in bulk
(a)
Self-propelled cargo boats
1. All self-propelled cargo boats intended for the carriage of petroleum in bulk shall be fitted with Internal Combustion Engines of an approved type and sufficient in power to propel the vessel at a speed of not less than 7 knots.
2. Tonnage. - The maximum carrying capacity of a cargo boat built under (a) for inland and harbour purposes shall not exceed 500 tons.
3. Compartments. - (1) For all carrying capacities above 150 tons the vessel shall be divided into eight separate compartments, i.e.
1. Fore peak.
2. Store room.
3. 


,4, 5. Tanks in pairs.
6. Cofferdam.
7. Engine space.
8. After peak.


In the case of vessels contracted to carry 150 tons and under, the number of separate tanks may be limited to two pairs.
(2)
An expansion truck to contain 4 per cent of the contents shall be fitted over each cargo compartment.
(3)
A properly designed gas escape line shall be installed to each tank compartment.
(4)
Suitable arrangements shall be provided for preventing accumulation of gases in pockets.
(5)
Drain plugs shall be fitted in the bottom of each compartment.
(6)
Suitable ventilators protected with gauze wire shall be fitted to all compartments and the ventilators to cargo compartments shall be fitted with gas- tight adjustable shutter.
4. Decks. - (1) Gas-tight hatches shall be provided for easy access to each separate compartment. A similar hatch shall be provided for easy access to the store room. In the case of the fore peak and after peak manholes shall be provided.


(2)
All gas-tight hatches shall contain a screw plug not less than 6 in diameter.
(3)
A sky light of ample area shall be provided above the engine space. Doors shall be provided in the engine space casing on either side of the deck for easy access to the engine room.
(4)
A small bridge shall be provided forward of the engine room sufficiently high to ensure efficient navigation.
(5)
Bollards shall be fitted at convgas-tightentient places along the deck.
5. Pumps. - (1) The pump for discharging the cargo shall be situated so as to be clear of the engine-room and galley and shall be of an approved type.


(2)
Unless a separate power unit is provided for driving the pump, the pump shall be arranged in such a way as to afford easy connection to the main motor engine.
(3)
The pump shall be of an approved make but may be of any capacity and a spring loaded relief valve shall be provided on the discharge side of the pump, the valve to have an area of at least 60 per cent of that of the discharge pipe and to be adjusted to relieve at a pressure of 80 lbs. per square inch and connected by a pipe to the suction side of the pump.
(4)
A suitable hand pump capable of being used for pumping out any compartment shall be provided.
6. Pipes. - (1) Suction pipes shall run along the bottom frames with a separate branch to the after part of each compartment and the valves controlling each compartment shall be operated from the deck by an extended spindle running up through the deck and deck gland box, such pipes may, however, be run along the deck where the depth of the vessel permits.


(2)
The discharge pipes shall be fitted on deck and carried amidships with both and starboard discharge.
(3)
A bye-pass shall be fitted so that the barge can be loaded without the aid of the cargo pump. The barge may, however, be loaded through the hatches.
7. Construction. - The vessel shall be constructed in accordance with Llyods' or other approved Society Rules for bulk oil carrying vessels.


(b)
Cargo boats which are not self-propelled
1. Tonnage. - The maximum carrying capacity for a cargo boat built (b) for inland and harbour purposes shall not exceed 500 tons
2. Compartments. - (1) For all carrying capacities above 150 tons, the cargo boat shall be divided into 6 compartments, or if fitted with a motor pump, into 7 compartments i.e.,
1. Chain locker or fore peak.
2. Hold or store-room
3. 


, 4, 5. Tanks in pairs
6. Confferdam or after peak
7. Motor space.


In the case of a cargo boat constructed to carry 150 tons or under the number of separate tanks may be limited to two.
(2)
An expansion trunk to contain 4 per cent of the contents shall be fitted over each cargo compartment.
(3)
A properly designed gas escape line shall be installed to each tank compartment.
(4)
Suitable arrangements shall be provided for preventing accumulation of gases in pockets.
(5)
Drain plugs shall be fitted in the bottom of each compartment.
(6)
Suitable ventilators protected with gauze wires shall be fitted to all compartments and the ventilators to cargo compartments shall be fitted with gas-tight adjustable shutters.
3. Docks. - (1) Gas-tight hatches shall be provided for easy access to each separate compartment. A similar hatch shall be provided for easy access to the fore hold or storeroom. A man-hole shall be provided for the chain locker and peaks.


(2)
All gas-tight hatches shall contain a screw plug not less than 6" in diameter.
(3)
A sky-light of ample area shall be provided above the motor space. Access to the pumps room shall be made through a deck man-hole.
(4)
Bollards shall be fitted at convenient places along the deck.
4. Pumps. - (1) The pump for discharging the cargo, if motor driven, shall be situated in an approved space and shall be of an approved type.


(2)
A suitable hand pump capable of being used for pumping out, any compartment shall be provided.
5. Pipes. - Pipes shall be arranged as in the case of self-propelled cargo boats.
6. Construction. - The vessels shall be constructed in accordance with Lloyd's or other approved Society's Rules for bulk oil carrying vessels.


Appendix "C" To Rule 51
(Vide Rules 4 and 8, Part II)
Special requirements for Bulk Oil Vessels discharging Dangerous Petroleum with the Ship's Own Power
1. Bulk oil vessels discharging dangerous petroleum with their own power shall be constructed in accordance with Lloyd's or other approved Society's Rules for vessels intended to carry petroleum in bulk.
2. The propelling machinery shall be placed at the after end of the ship.
3. The casing protecting the propelling machinery space shall be not less than 7 feet in height from the main deck
4. All opening in this casing shall be closed air-tight.
5. Any other precaution deemed necessary to prevent petrol vapour entering the engine-room or stoke-hold shall be carried out.
6. Where steam is used for the cargo pump, it shall be supplied from ship's main boilers and the smoke-tubes, uptake and funnel shall be clear of soot before commencing discharge.


Appendix "D" To Rules 51
(Vide rules 11 and 12, Part IV)
Requirements for Cargo Boats intended to be employed in carriage of Dangerous Petroleum in the Port of Bombay
1. The cargo boat must be of iron steel in good repair, painted red and holding a cargo boat licence for the year.
2. The cargo boat must have a water-tight collision bulk-head forward and a water-tight bulk head at the after end of cargo space.
3. No wood is to be used in the construction or fittings such as linings of the spaces fore and aft of the bulk heads, etc. but external rubbing strikes of wood will be permitted.
4. Masts, if fitted, shall be of iron or steel and if no mast be fitted there shall be provided an iron or steel stanchion 15 feet high on which the red flag prescribed below shall be exhibited.
5. Bilges are to be covered with iron or steel plates; gratings or perforated plates through which the state of the bilges can at all time be readily examined.
6. Wire ropes only are to be used for securing the cargo boat to the tug or wharf but hemp or coir hawsers may be allowed for securing the cargo boat to a vessel lying in the harbour.
7. Two anchors shall be carried with a least 15 fathoms of chain cable for each.
8. The anchor shall be carried one at each end of the cargo boat and when going alongside a wharf to discharge both anchors are to be let go some distance off and the cargo boat is then to be hauled alongside by wire ropes and secured.
9. The cargo boat shall be decked fore and aft with iron or steel and the hatch covers shall be fitted with hinges and securing nuts to close down and to be as air-tight as possible.
10. A pump shall be fitted leading to the bilges.
11. Two deck sockets of suitable diameters for carrying cowl ventilators shall be fitted in each compartment as "down-takes" and "uptakes" respectively.
12. The venlating shaft shall be carried down to within 6" of the floors and the cowl protected against sparks by 32 mesh wire. The deck sockets may be spaced diagonally or in a fore and aft line as convenient and shall be fitted with valves or plugs to prevent the intake of air from the cargo space when required.
13. A red flag not less than 6 feet by 4 feet with good halyards shall be carried.
14. The cooking galley, if fitted, shall be provided with a lock so that it can be secured from use when necessary.
15. A buoy, which shall be a drum measuring 1'9" in length and V2" in diameter painted red and properly stropped with an iron band in the middle having a ring attached to which shall be secured a 3" rope 15 fathoms long, shall be attached to such part of the lighter as is least encumbered with spars, the position to be approved by the Deputy Conservator
52.
 The rules regulating the importation, possession and transport of petroleum apply muatis mutandis to be importation, possession and transport of, acetone, wood naptha and methyl alcohol.
53.
 The use of a tank barge by vessels for the purpose of removing ballast water containing oil is compulsory in the port.


Death From Unnatural Causes
54.
 If the death of any person shall occur on board a vessel within the limit of the Port if such death shall be due to any but natural causes, the Master, or other persons having for the time being the charge or control of such vessel, shall fort with report in writing the facts of such death, and (if possible), the cause thereof to the Deputy Conservator



