



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860 



Rule ADMIRALTY-JURISDICTION-INDIA-ACT-1860 of 1860





            Published on 13 August 1860
          



              
                Commenced on 13 August 1860
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 13 August 1860.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860
(23 & 24 VICT., C. 88)
1366.
 


[13th August, 1860]
An Act to extend certain Provisions for Admiralty Jurisdiction in the Colonies to Her Majesty's Territories in India.
[Preamble reciting 12 & 13 Vict. C. 96, Section 5; and enacting words were repealed by 55 &  56 Vict., C. 19]
1.
 [ Applicability of principal Act to British India and British Burma.- 
[Substituted by A.A.P.O., 1937.]




The Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849, shall apply to British India and British Burma as it applies  to colonies.]
2.
 Proceedings in case of persons entitled to be tried by the Supreme Court of a  Presidency.-


Provided always that where any person within any place in India is charged  with the commission of any offence in respect of which jurisdiction is given by the said Act, or  where any person charged with the commission of any such offence is brought for trial under  the said Act to any place in India, if at any time before his trial he makes it appear to the Court  exercising criminal jurisdiction in the place where he is so charged or brought for trial, that in  case the offence charged had been committed in such place he could have been tried only in  the Supreme Court of one of the three Presidencies in India; and claim to be tried by such a  Supreme Court accordingly, the said Court exercising criminal jurisdiction as aforesaid shall  certify the fact and claim to the Governor of such place or chief local authority thereof; and  such Governor or Chief local authority thereupon shall order and cause the person charged to  be sent in custody to such one of the Presidencies as such Governor shall think fit for trial  before the Supreme Court of such Presidency; and the said Supreme Court and all public  officers and other persons in the Presidency shall have the same jurisdiction and authorities  and proceed in the same manner in relation to the person charged with such offence as if the  same had been committed or originally charged to have been committed within the limits of  the ordinary jurisdiction of such Supreme Court.



