



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


Important Directions Regarding Official Language Policy





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


Important Directions Regarding Official Language Policy


Rule IMPORTANT-DIRECTIONS-REGARDING-OFFICIAL-LANGUAGE-POLICY of 1800





            Published on 1 January 1800
          



              
                Commenced on 1 January 1800
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 1 January 1800.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






Important Directions Regarding Official Language Policy
18.
 


/819
(1)
Under section 3(3) of the Official Language Act, resolutions, general orders, rules, notifications, agreements, administrative and other reports or Press communiques should invariably be issued bilingually. For any violation the officer signing such documents will be held responsible.
(2)
The answers of question papers, except that of the compulsory paper of English, should also be allowed to be written in Hindi in recruitment examinations of subordinate services and such question papers should be made available both in Hindi and English. In interviews too, there should invariably be option to converse in Hindi.
The candidates should have the option to answer the question papers of all the in-service, departmental and promotion examinations (including all India level examinations) of all the Ministries, Departments of the Central Government and its attached and subordinate offices and of all corporations, undertakings, banks, etc., owned or controlled by the Central Government in Hindi. The question papers should be set in both the languages (Hindi and English). Wherever interview is to be held, the candidate should have the option to answer in Hindi.
(3)
The scientists, etc., should be motivated and encouraged to read their research papers in Hindi in all the scientific/ technical seminars and discussions, etc., The said research papers should relate to the particular subjects of the Ministry/ Department and Office concerned.
(4)
Every type of training, whether of long-term or of short-term, should generally be imparted through Hindi medium in 'A' and 'B' regions. For imparting training in 'C' region the training material should be prepared both in Hindi and in English and made available to the trainees in Hindi or in English as per their requirements.
(5)
So long as the prescribed targets regarding Hindi typists and Hindi stenographers are not achieved in the Central Government offices, only Hindi typists and Hindi stenographers should be appointed.
(6)
International Treaties and Agreements should invariably be got prepared both in Hindi as well as in English. There should be authentic translations of Treaties and Agreements entered into in other countries and they should be kept on file for record.
(7)
Under rule 10(4), the following items of work should be done in Hindi in the branches of the scheduled banks-Demand drafts, payment orders to be issued on the application form filled by the customers in Hindi and on the application forms filled in English with the consent of the customers, all kinds of lists-returns, fixed deposit receipts, communications regarding cheque-book, etc., entries in daily ledger, muster, dispatch book, pass book, entries in log book, work relating to priority areas security and customer services, opening of new accounts, writing of addresses on envelopes, work relating to travelling allowance, leave, provident fund, house building advance, documents related to medical facilities of the employees, agenda and minutes of the meetings.
(8)
Stationery items, name plates, notice boards, forms, procedural literature, rubber-stamps, invitation cards, etc., of all the Ministries/ Departments including Indian offices located abroad, should invariably be got prepared both in Hindi and English.
(9)
The officers of IAS and other all India services are imparted compulsory training in Hindi during their training in Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie so that they could make use of it in official work. However, most of the officers do not use Hindi in their official work after joining the service. As such officials/ employees working under them do not get the right message. Consequently, Hindi is not used in official work to the extent required. It is the Constitutional obligation of senior officials of Ministries/ Departments/ Offices /Undertakings to make increasing use of Hindi in their official work. This in turn will motivate the officials/ employees working under them, thereby giving impetus to the compliance of the Official Language Policy.
(10)
All the Ministries/ Departments should widely promote and propagate the various incentive schemes of this department in their respective attached and subordinate offices in order to accelerate the use of Hindi, so that maximum number of officials/ employees are benefited by these schemes and Hindi is increasingly used in official work.
(11)
Information pertaining to quarterly progress report should be made available to the Department of Official Language, Department in the prescribed proforma on E-Mail by the 15th of the month following the expiry of each quarter. Signed copy must be sent separately.
(12)
With a view to sensitizing the officials/ employees about compliance of the Official Language Policy of the Government, it is necessary that the review of progress made in the implementation of Official Language Hindi in Official work is not confined to the meeting of the Official Language Implementation Committees. In order to make its monitoring more efficient and effective, it is necessary to regularly discuss it in detail in every meeting convened by the administrative head of the Ministries/Departments/Offices and to include it as a standing item of the agenda.
(13)
The officers/ employees handling Hindi work including training and workshops should also be provided good and sufficient space to sit in the office to facilitate them to discharge their duties properly.
(14)
Ministries/Departments/Offices, etc., should regularly nominate their employees to the different training programmes of the Department of Official Language and direct them to be present in the classes regularly, to take training with devotion and sit in the examination. Any instance of discontinuing training or not writing the examination should be severely dealt with.
(15)
All translators should be provided with standard dictionaries (Hindi-English, English-Hindi) and other technical glossaries, so that they may use them in their translation work.
(16)
All the Ministries/Departments/Offices, etc., should make available the facility of computer for the use of "Leela Hindi Prabodh, Prav -en and Prgya" software, etc., for the benefit of the officers/ employees nominated for training in Hindi.
(17)
All the Ministries/Departments/Offices, etc., should encourage original book writing in Hindi on subjects concerning their. administrative responsibilities and take necessary steps to enrich their departmental glossaries.
(18)
All the Ministries/Departments/Offices, etc., should direct all their training institutes to make provision of training in Rajbhasha Hindi at the same level as at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration and generate necessary literature on their subjects so that after training the officers/ employees should be able to do their work in Rajbhasha Hindi easily.
(19)
All the Ministries/ Departments should use the Hindi words "3 1 Tr " or "{-c1 v t" in place of the words " f - i fir" in their official work and in their in-house magazines.



