



Take notes as you read a judgment using our 
Virtual Legal Assistant
 and get email alerts whenever a new judgment matches your query (
Query Alert Service
). Try out our 
Premium Member Services
 -- 
Sign up today
 and get free trial for one month.




Union of India - Act


The Safe Custody, Preservation, and Inspection Production of Board and Committee Election Paper, Rules 1926





      UNION OF INDIA

      India
    


The Safe Custody, Preservation, and Inspection Production of Board and Committee Election Paper, Rules 1926 


Rule THE-SAFE-CUSTODY-PRESERVATION-AND-INSPECTION-PRODUCTION-OF-BOARD-AND-COMMITTEE-ELECTION-PAPER-RULES-1926 of 1926





            Published on 1 January 1926
          



              
                Commenced on 1 January 1926
              
              
                
              
            



            [This is the version of this document from 1 January 1926.]
          



            [Note: The original publication document is not available and this content could not be verified.]
          






The Safe Custody, Preservation, and Inspection Production of Board and Committee Election Paper, Rules 1926
Published vide Punjab Government Home Department General Gurdwaras Notification No. 2776, dated the Ist September, 1926.
1106.
 
1.
 


Electoral Rolls [of the Board or Committee constituencies prepared under the relevant rules made in this behalf] 
[Substituted for the words 'prepared in form I of the forms appended to Sikh Gurdwaras Board Election Rules, 1925' by Punjab Government Notification No. 765 Gurdwaras dated the 26th May, 1954.]
 registers and files of claims and objections and applications for correction of clerical errors in Electoral [Rolls] 
[Substituted for the word 'Rules' by Punjab Government Notification No. 765-Gurdwaras, dated the 26th May, 1954.]
 shall be kept in the general record-rooms of districts to which they relate, until the completion of the next revision of electoral rolls of the constituencies concerned and shall thereafter be destroyed.
2.
 


Copies of the final electoral rolls of the Board or Committee constituencies referred to above shall be kept in the general record-rooms of the districts to which they relate as well as in the Punjab Civil Secretariat, and shall be destroyed after the completion of next revision of the rolls.
3.
 


The nomination papers of candidates, the documents relating to the appointment of election agents, the [revocation] 
[Substituted for the word 'revocation' by Punjab Government Notification No. 765-Gurdwaras, dated the 26th May, 1954.]
 of such appointment and withdrawals from candidature shall be kept in the office of the Deputy Commissioner in whose district the counting of votes for the constituency concerned took place and shall be destroyed after one year unless their retention for a longer period is ordered by the [State] 
[Substituted for the word 'Local' by Punjab Government Notification NO. 765-Gurdwaras, dated the 26th May 1954.]
 Government or any officer duly authorised to order such retention
4.
 


Election petitions, with the proceedings of enquiries by the Enquiry Board, shall be kept in the Judicial Branch of the Punjab Civil Secretariat, and shall be destroyed after three years unless their retention for a longer period is ordered by the [State] 
[Word 'Lahore' omitted vide Punjab Notification No. 765-Gurdwaras, dated 26th May, 1954.]
 Government or any officer duly authorised to order such retention.
5.
 


Any person may inspect any of the documents mentioned in the above regulation and obtain copies thereof on payment of fees on the scale for the time being prescribed for the inspection of the purchase of copies of revenue records.
6.
 


Copies of electoral rolls pertaining to any of the Board or Committee constituencies may be purchased at the district to which they pertain or from the Punjab Civil Secretariat, [-] 
[Word 'Lahore' omitted vide Punjab Government Notification No. 765-Gurdwaras, dated the 26th May, 1954.]
 subject to the condition that 30 copies of each roll shall be retained in the Punjab Civil Secretariat.



