Assault.
Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation1 intending or knowing it2 to be likely
that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he
who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is
said to commit an assault.
Explanation.—Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a person
uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those
gestures or preparations amount to an assault.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
cause Z to believe that
A is about to strike Z, A has committed an assault.
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or knowing it to be
likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that he is about to cause the dog to
attack Z. A has committed an assault upon Z.
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, "I will give you a beating". Here, though the words
used by A could in no case amount to an assault, and though the mere gesture,
unaccompanied by any other circumstances, might not amount to an assault,
the gesture explained by the words may amount to an assault.
COMMENT.—
It is not every threat, when there is no actual personal violence that constitutes an
assault; there must, in all cases, be the means of carrying the threat into effect. If a
person is advancing in a threatening attitude, with an intention to strike another so that
his blow will almost immediately reach the other, if he is not stopped, then this is an
assault in point of law, though at the particular moment when he is stopped, he is not
near enough for his blow to take effect.965. In order to constitute assault it is not
necessary that there should be some actual hurt caused. A threat constitutes
assault.966. Pointing a loaded pistol at another is undoubtedly an assault within the
meaning of this section and as such punishable under section 352 IPC, 1860 though
not under section 307 IPC, 1860.967. In this connection see also sub-para entitled,
"attempt to discharge loaded firearm" under section 307 ante.
[s 351.1] Ingredients.—
The section requires two things—
(1) Making of any gesture or preparation by a person in the presence of another.
(2) Intention or knowledge of likelihood that such gesture or preparation will cause
the person present to apprehend that the person making it is about to use
criminal force to him.
1. 'Makes any gesture, or any preparation'.—Illustration (a) illustrates that gestures
which cause a person to apprehend that the person making them is about to use
criminal force amount to an assault. As seen from the definition of "assault", a gesture
or even a preparation on the part of accused would be sufficient to constitute "assault"
and accused need not have even attacked the deceased.
The apprehension of the use of criminal force must be from the person making the
gesture or preparation, and if that apprehension arises not from that person but from
somebody else, it does not amount to assault on the part of that person. Further,
criminal force cannot be said to be used by one person to another by causing change in
the position of another human being. Where, therefore, the accused himself did nothing
which could come under the definition of assault but simply made a gesture at which
his followers advanced a little forward towards the complainant in a threatening
manner, it was held that he was not guilty of the offence of assault under section
353.968. Where the accused, armed with a sharp-edged weapon, went to the shop of a
man and hurled a challenge to him from some distance asking him to come out and
threatening him that he would not go back without killing him, it was held that the
manner in which the accused hurled the challenge, he committed an assault within the
meaning of section 351 and the retaliation by that man was in self-defence.969.
Though mere preparation to commit a crime is not punishable (see section 511), yet
preparation with the intention specified in this section amounts to an assault: see ill.
(b).
2. 'Intending or knowing it to be likely'.—Intention or knowledge is the gist of the
offence. Inadvertent recklessness, i.e., a failure to give thought to the possibility of risk
involved in pursuing a course of action, is insufficient to amount to mens rea requisite
for a conviction for assault.970.
[s 351.2] Explanation.—
Mere words do not amount to an assault, but the words which the party threatening
uses at the time either give his gestures such a meaning as may make them amount to
an assault, or, on the other hand, may prevent them from being held to amount to an
assault. In the latter case, the effect of the words must be such as clearly to show the
party threatened that the party threatening has no present intention to use immediate
criminal force.971. A preparation taken with words which would cause a person to
apprehend that criminal force would be used to him, if he persisted in a particular
course of conduct, does not amount to an assault, if there is no evidence to show that
the accused was about to use criminal force to him then and there.972.
[s 351.3] Blood transfusion without consent.—
A person, aged 57, and a Jehovah's witness was seriously injured. He carried a card
stating that no blood was to be administered under any circumstances. The doctor
administered blood transfusions which he considered necessary to preserve the
victim's life. The doctor was held liable in battery for treating the adult patient in a
manner to which he did not consent.973.
965. Stephens v Myers, (1830) 4 C&P 349.
966. Rupabati v Shyama, (1958) Cut 710.
967. Swadesh Mahato, 1979 Cr LJ 1275 (Pat); See also James, (1844) 1 C&K 530; Vijaidutta Jha,
(1947) Nag 237.
968. Muneshwar Bux Singh, (1938) 14 Luck 409 .
969. Mathew v State of Kerala, 1993 Cr LJ 213 (Ker). R v Chan-Fook, (1994) 2 All ER 552 , the
complainant suffered no physical injury as a result of the assault, he felt abused, humiliated and
frightened.
970. R v Nash, (1991) Cr LR 768 (CA), Offences Against the Person Act, 1861, section 47
(English).
971. AC Cama v HF Morgan, (1864) 1 BHC 205.
972. Birbal Khalifa, (1902) 30 Cal 97 .
973. Macette v Shulman, (1991) 2 Mad LR 162 (CA).