Rape.
A man is said to commit "rape" if he —
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a
woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into
the vagina, the urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or
any other person; or
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into
the vagina, urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her do
so with him or any other person; or
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do
so with him or any other person;
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:
—
First.—Against her will.
Secondly.—Without her consent.
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her
or any person in whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt.
Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband
and that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to
whom she is or believes herself to be lawfully married.
Fifthly.—With her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason
of unsoundness of mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally
or through another of any stupefying or unwholesome substance, she is unable
to understand the nature and consequences of that to which she gives consent.
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age.
Seventhly.—When she is unable to communicate consent.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, "vagina" shall also include
labia majora.
Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the
woman by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication,
communicates willingness to participate in the specific sexual act:
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration
shall not by the reason only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the
sexual activity.
Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape.
Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the
wife not being under fifteen years of age, is not rape.]
COMMENTS.—
The chapter sub-heading itself was changed from 'Of rape' to 'Sexual Offences' by Act
43 of 1983. The definition of rape has undergone a major change in admitting non-
penile penetration also but it continues to be gender-specific as committed against a
female. Earlier, a public interest litigation in Sakshi v UOI,1174. seeking for a declaration
to treat non-penile penetration also to be treated as rape failed when the Supreme
Court declined the relief but the Court's exhortation to alter the definition paved way for
the change of law.
[s 375.1] The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
Based on the recommendations made by the Justice Verma Committee, the Criminal
Law (Amendment) Act, 2013, came into force with effect from 3 February 2013. The
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 made amendments to the Cr PC, 1973, Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 and the IPC, 1860. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
expanded the definition of rape and substituted new sections for old sections such as
sections 370, 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D. The Criminal Law (Amendment)
Act, 2013 also amended existing sections as well as created new offences in the IPC,
1860, such as:
• Public servant disobeying direction under law (section 166A)
• Punishment for non-treatment of victim (section 166B)
• Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc. (section 326A)
• Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid (section 326B)
• Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment (section 354A)
• Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe (section 354B)
• Voyeurism (section 354C)
• Stalking (section 354D)
• Punishment for repeat offenders (section 376E)
The altered definition increasing the age of consent to 18 is also significant for it
makes any form of penetration as set out under the section with any girl less than 18
years of age to constitute rape. In a matrimonial setting, it would not have resulted in
rape if the woman was still less than 18 and above 15 so long as there was consent by
virtue of Exception 2 contained in the section. But the decision of the Supreme Court in
Independent Thought v UOI,1175. has held the provision to be unconstitutional in so far it
relates to girl between ages 15 to 18. Now the Exception 2 has to be read as 'Sexual
intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under
eighteen years of age is not rape'.
Rape is violative of victim's fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution. It is
the most morally and physically reprehensible crime in a society, as it is an assault on
the body, mind and privacy of the victim. While a murderer destroys the physical frame
of the victim, a rapist degrades and defiles the soul of a helpless female. Rape reduces
a woman to an animal, as it shakes the very core of her life. By no means can a rape
victim be called an accomplice. Rape leaves a permanent scar on the life of the victim,
and therefore a rape victim is placed on a higher pedestal than an injured witness. Rape
is a crime against the entire society and violates the human rights of the victim. Being
the most hated crime, rape tantamounts to a serious blow to the supreme honour of a
woman, and offends both, her esteem and dignity. It causes psychological and physical
harm to the victim, leaving upon her indelible marks.1176.
[s 375.2] First clause—Against her will.—In a case decided prior to the enactment of
the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013,
the prosecutrix stated that first offending act was done despite her resistance but
subsequently she became a consenting party because of repeated promises of
marriage. In the FIR she stated that she surrendered before him even at the time of the
first act because of the promises of marriage. The Court held that her version was not
reliable and found that the charge against the accused did not stand established.1177.
[s 375.3] Second clause—Without consent.—
It must be said that now in a custodial rape if the girl says that she did not give
consent, the Court shall presume that she did not consent1178. (vide section 114A
Indian Evidence Act, 1872).
[s 375.4] Consent on promise of marriage.—
Consent may be express or implied, coerced or misguided, obtained willingly or through
deceit. Consent is an act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind weighing,
as in a balance, the good and evil on each side. There is a clear distinction between
rape and consensual sex and the Court must very carefully examine whether the
accused had actually wanted to marry the victim, or had mala fide motive, and had
made a false promise to this effect only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls within the
ambit of cheating or deception. There is a distinction between the mere breach of a
promise, and not fulfilling a false promise. Thus, the Court must examine whether there
was made, at an early stage a false promise of marriage by the accused; and whether
the consent involved was given after wholly understanding the nature and
consequences of sexual indulgence. There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees
to have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion for the accused, and not
solely on account of misrepresentation made to her by the accused, or where an
accused on account of circumstances which he could not have foreseen, or which were
beyond his control, was unable to marry her, despite having every intention to do so.
Such cases must be treated differently. An accused can be convicted for rape only if
the Court reaches a conclusion that the intention of the accused was mala fide, and
that he had clandestine motives.1179. Where a man and woman were living together,
sometimes at her house and sometimes at the residence of the man and when the
evidence suggested that it was not a case of a passive submission in the face of any
psychological pressure exerted and there was a tacit consent not borne out of any
misconception created in her mind, complaint under this section will be untenable.1180.
In the event that the accused's promise is not false and has not been made with the
sole intention to seduce the prosecutrix to indulge in sexual acts, such an act(s) would
not amount to rape. Thus, the same would only hold that the prosecutrix, under a
misconception of fact to the extent that the accused is likely to marry her, submits to
the lust of the accused, such a fraudulent act cannot be said to be consensual, so far
as the offence of the accused is concerned.1181.
[s 375.5] Consent.—Meaning.—
IPC, 1860 does not define consent in positive terms. But what cannot be regarded as
consent is explained by section 90 which reads as 'consent given first under fear of
injury and second under a misconception of fact is not consent at all'. There are two
grounds specified in section 90 which are analogous to coercion and mistake of fact.
The factors set out in first part of section 90 are from the point of view of the victim
and second part of section 90 enacts the corresponding provision from the point of
view of the accused. It envisages that the accused has knowledge or has reason to
believe that the consent was given by the victim in consequence of fear of injury or
misconception of fact. Thus, the second part lays emphasis on the knowledge or
reasonable belief of the person who obtains the tainted consent. The requirements of
both the parts should be cumulatively satisfied. In other words, the Court has to see
whether the person giving the consent has given it under fear or misconception of fact
and the Court should also be satisfied that the person doing the act, i.e., the alleged
offender is conscious of the fact or should have reason to think that but for the fear or
misconception, the consent would not have been given. This is the scheme of section
90 which is couched in negative terminology. As observed in Deelip Singh @ Dilip Kumar
v State of Bihar,1182. section 90 cannot be considered as an exhaustive definition of
consent for the purposes of IPC, 1860. The normal connotation and concept of consent
is not intended to be excluded.1183. Submission of the body under the fear or terror
cannot be construed as a consented sexual act. Consent for the purpose of section
375 requires voluntary participation not only after the exercise of intelligence based on
the knowledge of the significance and moral quality of the act but after having fully
exercised the choice between resistance and assent. Whether there was consent or
not, is to be ascertained only on a careful study of all relevant circumstances.1184. The
consent does not merely mean hesitation or reluctance or a 'No' to any sexual
advances but has to be an affirmative one in clear terms. Consent has to be
categorical, unequivocal, voluntary and could be given by words, gestures or any form
of verbal or non-verbal communication signifying willingness to participate in specific
sexual act. Woman who does not physically resist act of rape shall not by that reason
only be regarded as having consented to such sexual activity. In normal parlance,
consent would mean voluntary agreement of complainant to engage in sexual activity
without being abused or exploited by coercion or threats. Normal rule is that consent
has to be given and it cannot be assumed.1185.
[s 375.6] Section 114A of Indian Evidence Act, 1872.—
India Evidence Act, 1872 was amended by the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1983 and
section 114A was incorporated which imposed the burden of proving "consent" upon
the accused in the cases of aggravated rape. This was an exception of the general rule
of presumption of innocence of the accused. By the Criminal Law Amendment Act,
2013 the old section was substituted on the recommendation of Justice Verma
Commission which reads as a follows;—
[114A] Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for rape
In a prosecution for rape under clause(a), clause(b), clause(c), clause(d), clause(e), clause(f),
clause(g), clause(g), clause(h), clause(i), clause(j), clause(k), clause(l), clause(m), clause(n), of
sub-section (2) of section 376, where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the
question is whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and
such woman states in her evidence before the Court that she did not consent, the Court shall
presume that she or he did not consent.
Explanation.—In this section "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts mentioned in
clauses (a) to (c) of section 375 of the Indian Penal Code
[s 375.7] Will and Consent.—
In Dileep Singh v State of Bihar,1186. the Supreme Court observed that:
though will and consent often interlace and an act done against the will of the person can
be said to be an act done without consent, the Indian Penal Code categorizes these two
expressions under separate heads in order to be as comprehensive as possible.
In the facts of the case what is crucial to be considered is whether first clause or
second clause of section 375 IPC, 1860 is attracted. The expressions 'against her will'
and 'without her consent' may overlap sometimes but surely the two expressions in
first and second clause have different connotation and dimension. The expression
'against her will' would ordinarily mean that the intercourse was done by a man with a
woman despite her resistance and opposition. On the other hand, the expression
'without her consent' would comprehend an act of reason accompanied by
deliberation.1187.
Supreme Court Guidelines to Prevent Child Sexual Abuse
(1) The persons in charge of the schools/educational institutions, special homes,
children homes, shelter homes, hostels, remand homes, jails, etc., or wherever children
are housed, if they come across instances of sexual abuse or assault on a minor child
which they believe to have committed or come to know that they are being sexually
molested or assaulted are directed to report those facts keeping upmost secrecy to the
nearest SJPU or local police, and they, depending upon the gravity of the complaint and
its genuineness, take appropriate follow up action casting no stigma to the child or to
the family members.
(2) Media personals, persons in charge of Hotel, lodge, hospital, clubs, studios,
photograph facilities have to duly comply with the provision of section 20 of the Act 32
of 2012 and provide information to the SJPU, or local police. Media has to strictly
comply with section 23 of the Act as well.
(3) Children with intellectual disability are more vulnerable to physical, sexual and
emotional abuse. Institutions which house them or persons in care and protection,
come across any act of sexual abuse, have a duty to bring to the notice of the Juvenile
Justice Board/SJPU or local police and they in turn be in touch with the competent
authority and take appropriate action.
(4) Further, it is made clear that if the perpetrator of the crime is a family member
himself, then utmost care be taken and further action be taken in consultation with the
mother or other female members of the family of the child, bearing in mind the fact that
best interest of the child is of paramount consideration.
(5) Hospitals, whether Government or privately-owned or medical institutions where
children are being treated come to know that children admitted are subjected to sexual
abuse, the same will immediately be reported to the nearest JJ Board/SJPU and the JJ
Board, in consultation with SJPU, should take appropriate steps in accordance with the
law safeguarding the interest of child.
(6) The non-reporting of the crime by anybody, after having come to know that a minor
child below the age of 18 years was subjected to any sexual assault, is a serious crime
and by not reporting they are screening offenders from legal punishment and hence be
held liable under the ordinary criminal law and prompt action be taken against them, in
accordance with law.
(7) Complaints, if any, received by NCPCR, SCPCR, Child Welfare Committee (CWC) and
Child Helpline, NGO's or Women's Organizations, etc., they may take further follow up
action in consultation with the nearest JJ Board, SJPU or local police in accordance
with law.
(8) The Central Government and the State Governments are directed to constitute
SJPUs in all the Districts, if not already constituted and they have to take prompt and
effective action in consultation with JJ Board to take care of child and protect the child
and also take appropriate steps against the perpetrator of the crime.
(9) The Central Government and every State Government should take all measures as
provided under section 43 of the The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012 (Act 32/2012) to give wide publicity of the provisions of the Act through media
including television, radio and print media, at regular intervals, to make the general
public, children as well as their parents and guardians, aware of the provisions of the
Act.
[Shankar Kisanrao Khade v State of Maharashtra.1188.]
[s 375.8] Consent of woman of Scheduled Caste or Tribe.—
In Re Director General of Prosecution,1189. it was held that the consent given by a
woman of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribe community for sexual intercourse to
one who was in a position to dominate her was no defence to a charge under section
375.
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
specified the sessions Court as a special Court under the Act. It was held that the trial
of the offence of rape by such a Court was not without jurisdiction. The sessions Court
remained the same Court even after its specification as a special Court. Setting aside
of conviction on the technical ground of want of jurisdiction which was raised after the
trial was over was not proper.1190.
[s 375.9] No consent.—
Where physical contact with the accused in the nature of a kiss or a hug was being
accepted by the prosecutrix without any protest, such past conduct will definitely not
amount to consent as for every sexual act, every time, consent is a must.1191. Where
the accused took away the prosecutrix to offer prayers to a deity, stayed in a
'dharamshala' for the night and had sex with her threatening her that the police were
nearby, it was held that the prosecutrix could not be described as an accomplice merely
because she did not raise alarm and the accused was liable to be convicted under
section 376.1192.
Where a blind helpless young girl was raped by the accused, it was held that expression
"consent" cannot be equated to inability to resist out of helplessness and absence of
injuries on the victim also does not by itself amount to consent by her.1193. Section
375, as amended by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013, lays down a woman
who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall not by the reason only of
that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
[s 375.10] Third and Fourth clauses—Passive non-resistance or consent obtained by
fraud.—
If a girl does not resist intercourse in consequence of misapprehension this does not
amount to a consent on her part. Where a medical man, to whom a girl of fourteen
years of age was sent for professional advice, had criminal connection with her, she
making no resistance from a bona fide belief that he was treating her medically, it was
held that he was guilty of rape.1194. The submission of her body by the prosecutrix
under fear or terror, cannot be construed as a consented sexual act. The Supreme
Court said in this case that the fact of consent is to be ascertained only on careful
study of all the relevant circumstances.1195.
[s 375.11] Husband and wife.—
Clause 4 deals with a rapist who knows that he is not his victim's husband and also
knows that her consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom
she is or believes herself to be lawfully married. In a case because of matrimonial
difficulties the wife left the matrimonial home and returned to live with her parents
informing the husband of her intention to petition for divorce. While the wife was so
staying at her parents' house, the husband forced his way in and attempted to have
sexual intercourse with her in the course of which he assaulted her. His conviction for
attempted rape and assault occasioning actual bodily harm was upheld.1196.
[s 375.12] Void marriage.—
Where the marriage with the complainant was void because the accused was already
married and had a living spouse, of which fact was known to the complainant, he was
held to be guilty of rape.1197.
[s 375.13] Pregnant woman.—
Stringent punishment has been provided for commission of rape on a woman known to
the culprit to be pregnant. It is, therefore, necessary knowledge of the accused should
be established by evidence.1198.
[s 375.14] Fifth clause—Sexual intercourse with idiot or drunken person.—
Where a man had carnal knowledge of a girl of imbecile mind, and the jury found that it
was without her consent, she being incapable of giving consent from defect of
understanding, it was held that this amounted to rape. Where the accused made a
woman quite drunk, and whilst she was insensible violated her person, it was held that
this offence was committed.1199. These cases will now fall within the mischief of the
fifth clause to section 375, IPC, 1860.
[s 375.15] Exception 2.—
The age limit was raised to 15 years by an amendment of the Act in 1949.
There may be cases in which the check of the law may be necessary to restrain men
from taking advantage of their marital rights prematurely. Instances of abuse by the
husband in such cases will fall under this clause.
[s 375.16] Section 375, Exception 2—Constitutional validity
In Independent Thought v UOI,1200. the Supreme Court held that sexual intercourse with
girl below 18 years of age is rape regardless of whether she is married or not. The
Court held that Exception 2 creates unnecessary and artificial distinction between
married girl child and unmarried girl child and has no rational nexus with any unclear
objective sought to be achieved. This artificial distinction is contrary to philosophy and
ethos of Article 15(3) of Constitution as well as contrary to Article 21 of Constitution. It
is also contrary to philosophy behind some statutes, bodily integrity of girl child and her
reproductive choice. It is inconsistent with provisions of POCSO, which must prevail.
The Supreme Court held that Exception 2 to section 375, IPC, 1860 insofar as it relates
to girl child below 18 years is liable to be struck down and is to read down as, "Sexual
intercourse or sexual acts by man with his own wife, wife not being 18 years, is not
rape".
[s 375.17] Attempt.—
Where the accused dragged the prosecutrix from a canal to the thrashing ground,
disrobed her and made her to lie down and attempted to rape her, it was held that it
was not a mere preparation but an attempt to commit rape.1201. It has been held that
intention or expression or even an indecent assault upon a woman does not amount to
attempt to rape unless the determination of the accused to gratify his passion at all
events and in spite of resistance is established.1202.
[s 375.18] Indecent assault is not attempt to commit rape.—
Indecent assault upon a woman does not amount to an attempt to commit rape, unless
the Court is satisfied that there was a determination in the accused to gratify his
passion at all events, and in spite of all resistance.1203.
1172. Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, section 3, for the heading "Of rape" (w.e.f. 25 December 1983).
1173. Subs. by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 (13 of 2013), section 9 (w.e.f. 3
February 2013). Prior to substitution by section 9 of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
(w.e.f. 3 February 2013), section 375 stood as: