Causing miscarriage.
Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child1 to miscarry, shall, if such
miscarriage2 be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the
woman, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if the woman be quick with
child,3 shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of this
section.
COMMENT.—
This section deals with the causing of miscarriage with the consent of the woman,
while the next section deals with the causing of miscarriage without such consent.
The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971) provides for the
termination of pregnancy by registered medical practitioners where its continuance
would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant woman or grave injury to her physical or
mental health or where there is a substantial risk that if the child was born, it would
suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped.
Where the pregnancy is alleged to have been caused by rape or as a result of failure of
a contraceptive used by a married woman or her husband, it would be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman. The termination
of a pregnancy by a person who is not a registered medical practitioner will be an
offence under the IPC, 1860, which to that extent is modified. It is high time that this
section too was suitably amended in terms of Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971 (34 of 1971) to include the various other grounds on account of which a
pregnancy can now be terminated by registered medical practitioner. In this connection
see also comment under section 91 ante. The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971 does not empower the husband, far less his relations, to prevent the concerned
woman from causing abortion if her case is covered under section 3 of that Act. Under
section 312 of the IPC, 1860 causing miscarriage is a penal offence. Relevant civil law
has since been embodied in the Act legalising termination of pregnancy under certain
circumstances. Since law is liberal for effecting such termination, the Act does not lay
down any provision on husband's consent in any situation.690.
1. 'With child' means pregnant, and it is not necessary to show that 'quickening', that is,
perception by the mother of the movements of the foetus, has taken place or that the
embryo has assumed a foetal form, the stage to which pregnancy has advanced and
the form which the ovum or embryo may have assumed are immaterial. Where a
woman was acquitted on a charge of causing herself to miscarry, on the ground that
she had only been pregnant for one month and that there was nothing which could be
called foetus or child, it was held that the acquittal was bad in law.691.
A woman quick with a child simply means a particular stage of pregnancy at which
quickening takes place. It is a perception of the woman of the movement of foetus.
Section 312 can even apply to a pregnant woman herself who causes her own
miscarriage. Good faith by itself is not enough. It has to be good faith for the purpose
of saving the life of the mother or the child and not otherwise. This observation of the
High Court of Delhi occurs in a case692. in which the doctor was found to be negligent
and careless in injecting needles twice for performing abdominocentesis. The result
was that the patient had to undergo forced abortion because septic developed. There
was consent only for one insertion and that was not at all applicable to second
insertion.
2. 'Miscarriage' is the premature expulsion of the child or foetus from the mother's
womb at any period of pregnancy before the term of gestation is completed.
[s 312.1] Death in attempt to terminate pregnancy.—
A woman had pregnancy of 24 weeks out of illicit relations and a doctor administered
an injection for termination of the pregnancy but the woman died the next day without
miscarriage. It was held that the act of the doctor amounted to 'voluntarily causing
miscarriage' within the meaning of section 312 read with section 511, as the doctor
was presumed to know the possible effects of the medicine.693. Deceased, an
unmarried girl was pregnant from accused, she died while causing miscarriage due to
perforation of uterus following abortion. It is a clear case that accused was
instrumental in causing the woman to miscarry and obviously it was not done in good
faith for purpose of saving life of deceased. Miscarriage was with a view to wipe out
evidence of deceased being pregnant. Accused liable to be convicted under sections
312, 315, 316 and 201 of IPC, 1860.694.
3. 'Quick with child'.—Quickening is the name applied to peculiar sensations
experienced by a woman about the fourth or fifth month of pregnancy.
690. Dr Mangla Dogra v AK Malhotra, AIR 2012 CC 1401 : 2012 (3) Ker LT (SN) 124 (P&H).
691. Ademma, (1886) 9 Mad 369.
692. Meeru Bhatia Prasad v State, 2002 Cr LJ 1674 (Del).
693. Akhil Kumar v State of MP, 1992 Cr LJ 2029 (MP). Mohamed Sharif v State of Orissa, 1996
Cr LJ 2826 (Ori) termination under medical advice, death not caused, the accused not liable.
694. State of Maharashtra v Flora Santuno Kutino, 2007 Cr LJ 2233 (Bom).