Punishment for murder.
Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or 196.[imprisonment for life],
and shall also be liable to fine.
COMMENT.—
Section 302 provides the punishment for murder. It stipulates a punishment of death or
imprisonment for life and fine. Once an offender is found by the Court to be guilty of
the offence of murder under section 302, then it has to sentence the offender to either
death or for imprisonment for life. The Court has no power to impose any lesser
sentence.
[s 302.1] Punishment for murder.—Evolution.—
Cr PC, 1898 had section 376(5) which required that if an accused is convicted of an
offence punishable with death and the Court sentences him with any punishment other
than death, the Court shall, in its judgment, give reasons why death sentence was not
passed. The provision of section 367(5) of the 1898 Code reads as follows:
(5) If the accused is convicted of an offence punishable with death, and the Court
sentences him to any punishment other than death, the Court shall in its judgment state
the reason why sentence of death was not passed.
In 1955, Cr PC (Amendment) Act, 1955 deleted the aforesaid section 367(5) of the
1898 Code. As a result of this amendment, which came into effect from 1 January
1956, it was no longer necessary for a Court to record in its judgment, in case of
conviction in connection with an offence punishable with death, any reason for not
imposing the death sentence. Thus, in the new Code, the discretion of the judge to
impose death sentence has been narrowed, for the Court has to provide special
reasons for imposing a sentence of death. It has made imprisonment for life the rule
and death sentence an exception, in the matter of awarding punishment for murder.197.
Reference to extenuating or mitigating circumstances in a case of death penalty was
made possibly for the first time by Supreme Court in the case of Nawab Singh v State of
UP.198. The Court held that in the facts of that case, murder was a cruel and deliberate
one and there were no extenuating circumstances. After the amendment of 1898 Code,
in the year 1955, the first case relating to death sentence, which came before Supreme
Court was that of Vadivelu Thevar v State of Madras,199. in which it was held that the
question of sentence has to be determined, not with reference to the volume or
character of the evidence adduced by the prosecution in support of the prosecution
case, but with reference to the fact whether there are any extenuating circumstances
which can be said to mitigate the enormity of the crime. If the Court is satisfied that
there are such mitigating circumstances, only then, it would be justified in imposing the
lesser of the two sentences provided by law.
[s 302.2] Constitutionality of Death penalty.—
The constitutionality of death sentence was challenged in the case of Jagmohan Singh
v State of UP.200. The Constitution Bench while upholding the constitutionality of death
penalty examined whether total discretion can be conferred on the judges in awarding
death sentence, when the statute does not provide any guidelines on how to exercise
the same. The decision in Jagmohan Singh (supra) was rendered when Cr PC, 1973
was not in existence. However, the aforesaid position substantially changed with the
introduction of a changed sentencing structure under Cr PC, 1973. In Rajendra Prasad v
State of UP,201. it was held that the special reasons necessary for imposing a death
penalty must relate not to the crime but to the criminal. It could be awarded only if the
security of the state and society, public order in the interest of the general public
compelled that course.
Proposition laid down by the Constitution Bench in Jagmohan Singh's Case
(i) The general legislative policy that underlines the structure of our criminal law,
principally contained in the IPC, 1860 and Cr PC, 1973, is to define an offence
with sufficient clarity and to prescribe only the maximum punishment therefore,
and to allow a very wide discretion to the Judge in the matter of fixing the degree
of punishment.
With the solitary exception of section 303, the same policy permeates section
302 and some other sections of IPC, 1860, where the maximum punishment is
the death penalty.
(ii) (a) No exhaustive enumeration of aggravating or mitigating circumstances which
should be considered when sentencing an offender, is possible. "The infinite
variety of cases and facets to each case would make general standards
either meaningless 'boiler plate' or a statement of the obvious that no Jury
(Judge) would need." (referred to McGoutha v California.202.
(b) The impossibility of laying down standards is at the very core of the
criminal law as administered in India which invests the Judges with a
very wide discretion in the matter of fixing the degree of punishment.
(iii) The view taken by the plurality in Furman v Georgia,203. decided by the Supreme
Court of the United States, to the effect, that a law which gives uncontrolled and
unguided discretion to the Jury (or the Judge) to choose arbitrarily between a
sentence of death and imprisonment for a capital offence, violates the Eighth
Amendment, is not applicable in India. We do not have in our Constitution any
provision like the Eighth Amendment, nor are we at liberty to apply the test of
reasonableness with the freedom with which the Judges of the Supreme Court
of America are accustomed to apply "the due process" clause. There are grave
doubts about the expediency of transplanting western experience in our
country. Social conditions are different and so also the general intellectual level.
Arguments which would be valid in respect of one area of the world may not
hold good in respect of another area.
(iv) (a) This discretion in the matter of sentence is to be exercised by the Judge
judicially, after balancing all the aggravating and mitigating circumstances of
the crime.
(b) The discretion is liable to be corrected by Superior Courts. The
exercise of judicial discretion on well-recognised principles is, in the
final analysis, the safest possible safeguard for the accused. In view
of the above, it will be impossible to say that there would be at all any
discrimination, since crime as crime may appear to be superficially
the same, but the facts and circumstances of a crime are widely
different. Thus considered, the provision in section 302, IPC, 1860 is
not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution on the ground that it
confers on the Judges an unguided and uncontrolled discretion in the
matter of awarding capital punishment or imprisonment for life.
(v) (a) Relevant facts and circumstances impinging on the nature and
circumstances of the crime can be brought before the Court at the
preconviction stage, notwithstanding the fact that no formal procedure for
producing evidence regarding such facts and circumstances had been
specifically provided. Where counsel addresses the Court with regard to the
character and standing of the accused, they are duly considered by the Court
unless there is something in the evidence itself which belies him or the Public
Prosecutor challenges the facts.
(b) It is to be emphasised that in exercising its discretion to choose either
of the two alternative sentences provided in section 302, IPC, 1860:
the Court is principally concerned with the facts and circumstances
whether aggravating or mitigating, which are connected with the
particular crime under inquiry. All such facts and circumstances are
capable of being proved in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian Evidence Act in a trial regulated by the CrPC. The trial does not
come to an end until all the relevant facts are proved and the counsel
on both sides have an opportunity to address the Court. The only thing
that remains is for the Judge to decide on the guilt and punishment
and that is whats. 306(2) and s. 309(2), CrPC purport to provide for.
These provisions are part of the procedure established by law and
unless it is shown that they are invalid for any other reasons they must
be regarded as valid. No reasons are offered to show that they are
constitutionally invalid and hence the death sentence imposed after
trial in accordance with the procedure established by law is not
unconstitutional under Art. 21.
[Jagmohan Singh v State of UP.]204.
[s 302.3] Evolution of Sentencing Policy
Capital punishment has been a subject matter of great social and judicial discussion
and catechism. From whatever point of view it is examined, one undisputable
statement of law follows that it is neither possible nor prudent to state any universal
formula which would be applicable to all the cases of criminology where capital
punishment has been prescribed. It shall always depend upon the facts and
circumstances of a given case.205.
[s 302.4] Phase-I (Focus on Crime).—
Jagmohan Singh's Case (supra) laid down that discretion in the matter of sentencing is
to be exercised by the judge after balancing all the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances "of the crime". Jagmohan Singh also laid down in proposition that while
choosing between the two alternative sentences provided in section 302 of IPC, 1860
(sentence of death and sentence of life imprisonment), the Court is principally
concerned with the aggravating or mitigating circumstances connected with the
"particular crime under inquiry".
[s 302.5] Legislative Change.—
The 41st Law Commission Report proposed extensive changes in the 1898 Code. In
paragraph 23.2 of the said report, the Law Commission recommended a set of new
provisions for governing "trials before a Court of sessions". With regard tosection 309
of the 1898 Code, the Law Commission recommended that hearing of the accused was
most desirable before passing any sentence against him. This recommendation was
accepted and incorporated while enacting section 235, Cr PC in 1973 Code within
Chapter XVIII of the same under the heading "Trial before a Court of Sessions". The
most significant change brought about by the incorporation of the recommendation of
the Law Commission, is the giving of an opportunity of hearing to the accused on the
question of sentence. This opportunity of hearing at the post-conviction stage gives the
accused an opportunity to raise fundamental issues for adjudication and effective
determination by Court of its sentencing discretion in a fair and reasonable manner. In
Santa Singh v State of Punjab,206. the Supreme Court held that this provision is in
consonance with the modern trends in penology and sentencing procedures. It was
further held that proper exercise of sentencing discretion calls for consideration of
various factors like the nature of offence, the circumstances—both extenuating or
aggravating, the prior criminal record, if any, of the offender, the age of the offender, his
background, his education, his personal life, his social adjustment, the emotional and
mental condition of the offender, the prospects for the rehabilitation of the offender, the
possibility of his rehabilitation in the life of community, the possibility of treatment or
training of the offender, the possibility that the sentence may serve as a deterrent to
crime by the offender or by others.
[s 302.6] Phase-II Doctrine of "Rarest of rare" (Shifting the focus from crime to
criminal).—
In Bachan Singh v State of Punjab,207. another Constitution Bench, while upholding the
constitutional validity of death sentence observed that for persons convicted of
murder, life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence an exception. The principal
questions considered in this case were:
(i) Whether death penalty provided for the offence of murder in Section 302, Penal Code is
unconstitutional.
(ii) If the answer to the foregoing question be in the negative, whether the sentencing
procedure provided in Section 354(3) of the CrPC, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974) is unconstitutional
on the ground that it invests the Court with unguided and untrammelled discretion and
allows death sentence to be arbitrarily or freakishly imposed on a person found guilty of
murder or any other capital offence punishable under the Indian Penal Code with death or, in
the alternative, with imprisonment for life.
The conclusion of the Constitution Bench was that the sentence of death ought to be
given only in the 'rarest of rare cases' [See the Box with 'Supreme Court Guidelines in
Bachan Singh'] and it should be given only when the option of awarding the sentence of
life imprisonment is "unquestionably foreclosed". It laid down the framework law on
this point. Bachan Singh effectively opened up Phase II of a sentencing policy by
shifting the focus from the crime to the crime and the criminal.
Supreme Court Guidelines in Bachan Singh
(i) The extreme penalty of death need not be inflicted except in gravest cases of
extreme culpability;
(ii) Before opting for the death penalty, the circumstances of the 'offender' also
require to be taken into consideration along with the circumstances of the
'crime';
(iii) Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception. In other
words, death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment appears
to be an altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the relevant
circumstances of the crime, and only provided, the option to impose sentence
of imprisonment for life cannot be conscientiously exercised having regard to
the nature and circumstances of the crime and all the relevant circumstances;
(iv) A balance-sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be drawn
up and in doing so the mitigating circumstances have to be accorded full
weightage and a just balance has to be struck between the aggravating and the
mitigating circumstances before the option is exercised.
[Bachan Singh v State of Punjab.208.]
The judgment in Machhi Singh v State of Rajasthan,209. did not only state the above
guidelines in some elaboration, but also specified the mitigating circumstances which
could be considered by the Court while determining such serious issues.210. Despite
the legislative change and Bachan Singh discarding proposition (iv)(a) of Jagmohan
Singh, Supreme Court in Machhi Singh revived the "balancing" of aggravating and
mitigating circumstances through a balance sheet theory. In doing so, it sought to
compare aggravating circumstances pertaining to a crime with the mitigating
circumstances pertaining to a criminal. It hardly need be stated, with respect, that
these are completely distinct and different elements and cannot be compared with one
another. A balance sheet cannot be drawn up of two distinct and different constituents
of an incident. Nevertheless, the balance sheet theory held the field post Machhi
Singh.211.
Supreme Court Guidelines in Machhi Singh
Factors to be considered while determining the "rarest of rare" case
I. Manner of commission of murder
33. When the murder is committed in an extremely brutal, grotesque, diabolical,
revolting, or dastardly manner so as to arouse intense and extreme indignation of the
community. For instance.
(i) When the house of the victim is set aflame with the end in view to roast him alive
in the house,
(ii) When the victim is subjected to inhuman acts of torture or cruelty in order to
bring about his or her death.
(iii) When the body of the victim is cut into pieces or his body is dismembered in a
fiendish manner.
II. Motive for commission of murder
34. When the murder is committed for a motive which evinces total depravity and
meanness. For instance, when (a) a hired assassin commits murder for the sake of
money or reward; (b) a cold-blooded murder is committed with a deliberate design in
order to inherit property or to gain control over property of a ward or a person under the
control of the murderer or vis-a-vis whom the murderer is in a dominating position or in
a position of trust; (c) a murder is committed in the course for betrayal of the
motherland.
III. Anti-social or socially abhorrent nature of the crime
(a) When murder of a member of a Scheduled Caste or minority community etc., is
committed not for personal reasons but in circumstances which arouse social wrath.
For instance, when such a crime is committed in order to terrorise such persons and
frighten them into fleeing from a place or in order to deprive them of, or make them
surrender, lands or benefits conferred on them with a view to reverse past injustices
and in order to restore the social balance.
(b) In cases of 'bride burning' and what are known as 'dowry-deaths' or when murder is
committed in order to remarry for the sake of extracting dowry once again or to marry
another woman on account of infatuation.
IV. Magnitude of crime
35. When the crime is enormous in proportion. For instance, when multiple murders say
of all or almost all the members of a family or a large number of persons of a particular
caste, community, or locality, are committed.
V. Personality of victim of murder
36. When the victim of murder is (a) an innocent child who could not have or has not
provided even an excuse, much less a provocation, for murder, (b) a helpless woman or
a person rendered helpless by old age or infirmity, (c) when the victim is a person vis-a-
vis whom the murderer is in a position of domination or trust, (d) when the victim is a
public figure generally loved and respected by the community for the services rendered
by him and the murder is committed for political or similar reasons other than personal
reasons.
[Machhi Singh v State of Punjab.212.]
It is always preferred not to fetter the judicial discretion by attempting to make
excessive enumeration, in one way or another; and that both aspects namely
aggravating and mitigating circumstances have to be given their respective weightage
and that the Court has to strike the balance between the two and see towards which
side the scale/balance of justice tilts.213.
The aggravating and mitigating circumstances required to be taken into consideration
while applying the doctrine of "rarest of rare" crime
39. Aggravating circumstances:
1. The offences relating to the commission of heinous crimes like murder, rape,
armed dacoity, etc. by the accused with a prior record of conviction for capital
felony.
2. The offence was committed while the offender was committing another serious
offence.
3. The offence was committed with the intention to create a fear psychosis in the
public at large and was committed in a public place by a weapon or device which
clearly could be hazardous to the life of more than one person.
4. The offence of murder was committed for ransom or like offences to receive
money or monetary benefits.
5. Hired killings.
6. The offence was committed outrageously for want only while involving inhumane
treatment and torture to the victim.
7. The offence was committed by a person while in lawful custody.
8. The offence was committed to prevent a person lawfully carrying out his duty like
arrest or custody in a place of lawful confinement of himself or another. For
instance, murder is of a person who had acted in lawful discharge of his duty
under section 43, Cr PC, 1973.
9. When the crime is enormous in proportion like making an attempt of murder of
the entire family or members of a particular community.
10. When the victim is innocent, helpless or a person relies upon the trust of
relationship and social norms, like a child, helpless woman, a daughter or a
niece staying with a father/uncle and is inflicted with the crime by such a
trusted person.
11. When murder is committed for a motive which evidences total depravity and
meanness.
12. When there is a cold-blooded murder without provocation.
13. The crime is committed so brutally that it pricks or shocks not only the judicial
conscience but even the conscience of the society.
Mitigating circumstances:
1. The manner and circumstances in and under which the offence was committed,
for example, extreme mental or emotional disturbance or extreme provocation in
contradistinction to all these situations in normal course.
2. The age of the accused is a relevant consideration but not a determinative factor
by itself.
3. The chances of the accused of not indulging in commission of the crime again
and the probability of the accused being reformed and rehabilitated.
4. The condition of the accused shows that he was mentally defective and the
defect impaired his capacity to appreciate the circumstances of his criminal
conduct.
5. The circumstances which, in normal course of life, would render such a
behaviour possible and could have the effect of giving rise to mental imbalance
in that given situation like persistent harassment or, in fact, leading to such a
peak of human behaviour that, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the
accused believed that he was morally justified in committing the offence.
6. Where the Court upon proper appreciation of evidence is of the view that the
crime was not committed in a pre-ordained manner and that the death resulted in
the course of commission of another crime and that there was a possibility of it
being construed as consequences to the commission of the primary crime.
7. Where it is absolutely unsafe to rely upon the testimony of a sole eye-witness
though prosecution has brought home the guilt of the accused.
40. While determining the questions relatable to sentencing policy, the Court has to
follow certain principles and those principles are the loadstar besides the above
considerations in imposition or otherwise of the death sentence.
Principles:
(1) The Court has to apply the test to determine, if it was the 'rarest of rare' case for
imposition of a death sentence.
(2) In the opinion of the Court, imposition of any other punishment, i.e., life
imprisonment would be completely inadequate and would not meet the ends of justice.
(3) Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception.
(4) The option to impose sentence of imprisonment for life cannot be cautiously
exercised having regard to the nature and circumstances of the crime and all relevant
considerations.
(5) The method (planned or otherwise) and the manner (extent of brutality and
inhumanity, etc.) in which the crime was committed and the circumstances leading to
commission of such heinous crime.
Ramnaresh v State of Chhattisgarh;214. Brajendra Singh v State of MP.215.
[s 302.7] Considerations for or against death sentence.—Balance sheet of
aggravating and mitigating factors.—
Both in Bachan Singh and Machhi Singh's cases, guidelines have been indicated by the
Supreme Court as to when this extreme sentence should be awarded and when not. In
fine, a balance-sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be drawn up
and in doing so the mitigating circumstances have to be accorded full weightage and a
just balance has to be struck between the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
before the option is exercised to award one sentence or the other.
The cardinal questions to be asked and answered are:—
(a) Is there something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of
imprisonment for life inadequate and calls for a death sentence?
(b) Are the circumstances of the crime such that there is no alternative but to
impose death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the
mitigating circumstances which speak in favour of the offender?
If after taking into consideration all these circumstances, it is felt that death sentence
is warranted, the Court would proceed to do so.216. Thus, where murder is
premeditated217. or is committed in an organised manner,218. or by a hired
assassin219. or by a lawyer220. or where it is gruesome221. or is committed with utmost
depravity,222. death sentence seems to be the proper sentence in all such cases.
[s 302.8] Need for flexibility.—
The Supreme Court has re-examined the categories after a gap of 25 years in Swami
Shraddananda v State of Karnataka.223. The circumstances and conditions of life have
very seriously changed since then and, therefore, even if those categories are to be
observed, some scope for flexibility should always be maintained. Giving a brief view of
the changed scenario, the Supreme Court noted that a careful reading of the Machhi
Singh categories makes it clear that the classification was made looking at murder
mainly as an act of maladjusted individual criminal(s). In 1983, the country was
relatively free from organised and professional crime. Abduction for ransom and gang
rape and murders committed in course of those offences were yet to become a
menace for the society compelling the legislature to create special slots for those
offences in IPC, 1860. At the time of Machhi Singh, Delhi had not witnessed the
infamous Sikh carnage. There had been no attack on the country's Parliament. There
were no bombs planted by terrorists killing completely innocent people, men, women
and children in dozens with sickening frequency. There were no private armies, no
mafia cornering huge Government contracts purely by muscle power, no reports of
killings of social activists and "whistle-blowers", no reports of custodial deaths and
rape and fake encounters by police or even by armed forces. These developments
would unquestionably find a more pronounced reflection in any classification if one
were to be made today. Relying upon the observations in Bachan Singh, therefore, even
though the categories framed in Machhi Singh provide very useful guidelines,
nonetheless those cannot be taken as inflexible, absolute or immutable. Further, even
in those categories, there would be scope for flexibility as observed in Bachan Singh
itself.
[s 302.9] Santosh Bariyar—A landmark.—
In Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v State of Maharashtra,224. while sharing
Supreme Court's "unease and sense of disquiet" it was observed that:
the balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances approach invoked on a case
by case basis has not worked sufficiently well so as to remove the vice of arbitrariness from
our capital sentencing system. It can be safely said that the Bachan Singh threshold of "the
rarest of rare cases" has been most variedly and inconsistently applied by the various High
Courts as also this Court.
The Judgments which are held to be per incurium in Santhosh Bariyar:
(1) Shivaji @ Dadya Shankar Alhat v State of Maharashtra,225.
(2) Mohan Anna Chavan v State of Maharashtra,226.
(3) Bantu v State of UP,227.
(4) Surja Ram v State of Rajasthan,228.
(5) Dayanidhi Bisoi v State of Orissa,229. and
(6) State of UP v Sattan @ Satyendra.230.
In Sangeet v State of Haryana,231. in an unprecedented Judgment, a two-judge bench of
the Supreme Court held that the Court has not endorsed the approach of aggravating
and mitigating circumstances in the Constitution Bench Judgment in Bachan Singh and
observed that it needs a fresh look. [See the Box with 'Principles summarised in
Sangeet's Case by Supreme Court'.] The bench observed that even though Bachan Singh
intended "principled sentencing", sentencing has now really become judge-centric as
highlighted in Swamy Shraddananda and Bariyar. This aspect of the sentencing policy in
Phase II as introduced by the Constitution Bench in Bachan Singh seems to have been
lost in transition.
Principles summarised in Sangeet's Case by Supreme Court
80. 1. This Court has not endorsed the approach of aggravating and mitigating
circumstances in Bachan Singh. However, this approach has been adopted in several
decisions. This needs a fresh look. In any event, there is little or no uniformity in the
application of this approach.
2. Aggravating circumstances relate to the crime while mitigating circumstances relate to
the criminal. A balance sheet cannot be drawn up for comparing the two. The
considerations for both are distinct and unrelated. The use of the mantra of aggravating and
mitigating circumstances needs a review.
3. In the sentencing process, both the crime and the criminal are equally important. We
have, unfortunately, not taken the sentencing process as seriously as it should be with the
result that in capital offences, it has become judge-centric sentencing rather than principled
sentencing.
4. The Constitution Bench of this Court has not encouraged standardization and
categorization of crimes and even otherwise it is not possible to standardize and categorize
all crimes.
5. The grant of remissions is statutory. However, to prevent its arbitrary exercise, the
legislature has built in some procedural and substantive checks in the statute. These need
to be faithfully enforced.
6. Remission can be granted under Section 432 of the CrPC in the case of a definite term of
sentence. The power under this Section is available only for granting "additional" remission,
that is, for a period over and above the remission granted or awarded to a convict under the
Jail Manual or other statutory rules. If the term of sentence is indefinite (as in life
imprisonment), the power under Section 432 of the CrPC can certainly be exercised but not
on the basis that life imprisonment is an arbitrary or notional figure of twenty years of
imprisonment.
7. Before actually exercising the power of remission under Section 432 of the CrPC the
appropriate Government must obtain the opinion (with reasons) of the presiding judge of
the convicting or confirming Court. Remissions can, therefore, be given only on a case-by-
case basis and not in a wholesale manner.
[Sangeet v State of Haryana.]232.
In Mohinder Singh v State of Punjab,233. another two-Judge Bench analysed the various
principles laid down in decisions reported in Swamy Shraddananda @ Murali Manohar
Mishra v State of Karnataka,234. Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v State of
Maharashtra,235. Mohd Farooq Abdul Gafur v State of Maharashtra,236. Haresh
Mohandas Rajput v State of Maharashtra,237. State of Maharashtra v Goraksha Ambaji
Adsul,238. and the Supreme Court's decision reported in Mohammed Ajmal
Mohammadamir Kasab @ Abu Mujahid v State of Maharashtra,239. and held that a
conclusion as to the 'rarest of rare' aspect with respect to a matter shall entail
identification of aggravating and mitigating circumstances relating both to the crime
and the criminal and the expression 'special reasons' obviously means ('exceptional
reasons') founded on the exceptionally grave circumstances of the particular case
relating to the crime as well as the criminal.240.
Principles summarised in Mohinder Singh's Case by Supreme Court
(i) A conclusion as to the 'rarest of rare' aspect with respect to a matter shall entail
identification of aggravating and mitigating circumstances relating both to the crime
and the criminal.
(ii) The expression 'special reasons' obviously means ('exceptional reasons') founded
on the exceptionally grave circumstances of the particular case relating to the crime as
well as the criminal.
(iii) The decision in Ravji @ Ram Chandra v State of Rajasthan,241. which was
subsequently followed in six other cases, namely, Shivaji @ Dadya Shankar Alhat v State
of Maharashtra,242. Mohan Anna Chavan v State of Maharashtra,243. Bantu v State of
UP,244. Surja Ram v State of Rajasthan,245. Dayanidhi Bisoi v State of Orissa,246. and
State of UP v Sattan @ Satyendra and Others,247. wherein it was held that it is only
characteristics relating to crime, to the exclusion of the ones relating to criminal, which
are relevant to sentencing in criminal trial, was rendered per incuriam qua Bachan Singh
(supra) in the decision reported in Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar (supra) at 529.
(iv) Public opinion is difficult to fit in the 'rarest of rare' matrix. People's perception of
crime is neither an objective circumstance relating to crime nor to the criminal.
Perception of public is extraneous to conviction as also sentencing, at least in capital
sentencing according to the mandate of Bachan Singh (supra). [2009 (6) SCC 498
[LNIND 2009 SC 1278] at p 535.]
(v) Capital sentencing is one such field where the safeguards continuously take
strength from the Constitution. [(2009) 6 SCC 498 [LNIND 2009 SC 1278] at 539.]
(vi) The Apex Court as the final reviewing authority has a far more serious and intensive
duty to discharge and the Court not only has to ensure that award of death penalty
does not become a perfunctory exercise of discretion under section 302 after an
ostensible consideration of 'rarest of rare' doctrine, but also that the decision-making
process survives the special rigours of procedural justice applicable in this regard.248.
(vii) The 'rarest of rare' case comes when a convict would be a menace and threat to
the harmonious and peaceful coexistence of the society. The crime may be heinous or
brutal but may not be in the category of "the rarest of the rare case". There must be no
reason to believe that the accused cannot be reformed or rehabilitated and that he is
likely to continue criminal acts of violence as would constitute a continuing threat to
the society.249.
(viii) Life sentence is the rule and the death penalty is the exception. The condition of
providing special reasons for awarding death penalty is not to be construed
linguistically but it is to satisfy the basic features of a reasoning supporting and
making award of death penalty unquestionable.
(ix) The circumstances and the manner of committing the crime should be such that it
pricks the judicial conscience of the Court to the extent that the only and inevitable
conclusion should be awarding of death penalty.
State of Maharashtra v Goraksha Ambaji Adsul250. and Mohinder Singh v State of
Punjab.251.
[s 302.10] Crime Test, Criminal Test and RR Test.—
The tests that we have to apply, while awarding death sentence, are "crime test",
"criminal test" and the RR Test and not "balancing test". To award death sentence, the
"crime test" has to be fully satisfied, that is 100% and "criminal test" 0%, that is no
Mitigating Circumstance favouring the accused. If there is any circumstance favouring
the accused, like lack of intention to commit the crime, possibility of reformation,
young age of the accused, not a menace to the society, no previous track record, etc.,
the "criminal test" may favour the accused to avoid the capital punishment. Even if both
the tests are satisfied, that is the aggravating circumstances to the fullest extent and
no mitigating circumstances favouring the accused, still we have to apply finally the
Rarest of Rare Case test (RR Test). RR Test depends upon the perception of the society
that is "society centric" and not "Judge centric", that is, whether the society will approve
the awarding of death sentence to certainty types of crimes or not. While applying that
test, the Court has to look into variety of factors like society's abhorrence, extreme
indignation and antipathy to certain types of crimes like sexual assault and murder of
minor girls intellectually challenged, suffering from physical disability, old and infirm
women with those disabilities, etc. Examples are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
Courts award death sentence since situation demands so, due to constitutional
compulsion, reflected by the will of the people and not the will of the judges.252.
Some Cases where the Court applied the Criminal test to avoid Death Penalty:
(1) Kumudi Lal v State of UP,253.
(2) Raju v State of Haryana,254.
(3) Bantu @ Naresh Giri v State of MP,255.
(4) State of Maharashtra v Suresh,256.
(5) Amrit Singh v State of Punjab,257.
(6) Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod v State of Gujarat,258.
(7) Surendra Pal Shivbalak v State of Gujarat,259.
(8) Amit v State of Maharashtra.260.
[s 302.11] Via media between Death Sentence and Life Imprisonment.—
It was in Swamy Shraddananda (2) v State of Karnataka,261. that a three-Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court concluded that there is a good and strong basis for the Court to
substitute a death sentence by life imprisonment or by a term in excess of 14 years and
further to direct that the convict must not be released from the prison for the rest of his
life or for the actual term as specified in the order, as the case may be. But a two-Judge
Bench in Sangeet v State of Haryana,262. in which it was held that:
a reading of some recent decisions delivered by this Court seems to suggest that the
remission power of the appropriate Government has effectively been nullified by awarding
sentences of 20 years, 25 years and in some cases without any remission. Is this
permissible? Can this Court (or any Court for that matter) restrain the appropriate
Government from granting remission of a sentence to a convict? What this Court has done
in Swamy Shraddananda and several other cases, by giving a sentence in a capital offence
of 20 years or 30 years imprisonment without remission, is to effectively injunct the
appropriate Government from exercising its power of remission for the specified period. In
our opinion, this issue needs further and greater discussion, but as at present advised, we
are of the opinion that this is not permissible. The appropriate Government cannot be told
that it is prohibited from granting remission of a sentence. Similarly, a convict cannot be
told that he cannot apply for a remission in his sentence, whatever the reason. In this case,
though the Division Bench raised a doubt about the decision of a three-Judge Bench in
Swamy Shraddananda (supra), yet the same has not been referred to a larger Bench.
In Sahib Hussain @ Sahib Jan v State of Rajasthan,263. another two-Judge Bench
reiterated the position held in Swamy Shraddananda (supra) by holding that the
observations in Sangeet (supra) are not warranted. In Gurvail Singh @ Gala v State of
Punjab,264. other two-Judge bench also termed the remarks in Sangeet (supra) as
'unwarranted' and opined that if the two-judge bench was of the opinion that earlier
judgments, even of a larger Bench were not justified, the Bench ought to have referred
the matter to the larger Bench. However, in some cases, the Court had also been
voicing concern about the statutory basis of such orders.265. In a judgment,266.
Supreme Court opined that:
We are of the view that it will do well in case a proper amendment u/s. 53 of IPC is provided,
introducing one more category of punishment—life imprisonment without commutation or
remission. Dr. Justice V. S. Malimath in the Report on "Committee of Reforms of Criminal
Justice System", submitted in 2003, had made such a suggestion but so far no serious
steps have been taken in that regard. There could be a provision for imprisonment till death
without remission or commutation.
[s 302.12] Sessions' Court's power.—
The Session Judges do not have the power to impose the harsher variety of life
sentence which is recognised by Swamy Shraddananda (2) v State of Karnataka267. as
an option available in law for the Courts to avoid the harshest, irreversible and
incorrectable sentence of death. That sentencing option is available only to
Constitutional Courts —the High Courts and the Supreme Court.268.
[s 302.13] Delay in execution of death sentence.—
It is well-established that exercising of power under Article 72/161 by the President or
the Governor is a Constitutional obligation and not a mere prerogative.269. Time taken
in Court proceedings cannot be taken into account to say that there is a delay which
would convert a death sentence into one for life.270. In TV Vatheeswaran,271. overruled
in Triveni Ben v State of Gujarat,272. a two-Judge Bench of Supreme Court considered
whether the accused, who was convicted for an offence of murder and sentenced to
death, kept in solitary confinement for about eight years was entitled to commutation
of death sentence. It was held that delay exceeding two years in the execution of a
sentence of death should be considered sufficient to entitle the person under sentence
of death to invoke Article 21 and demand the quashing of the sentence of death.273.
But a three-Judge bench in Sher Singh v State of Punjab,274. held that though prolonged
delay in the execution of a death sentence is unquestionably an important
consideration for determining whether the sentence should be allowed to be executed,
no hard and fast rule that "delay exceeding two years in the execution of a sentence of
death should be considered sufficient to entitle the person under sentence of death to
invoke Art. 21 and demand the quashing of the sentence of death" can be laid down as
has been done in Vatheeswaran (supra). Javed Ahmed v State of Maharashtra,275. re-
iterated the proposition laid down in Vatheeswaran (supra) case and doubted the
competence of the three-judge bench to overrule the Vatheeswaran case. The
conflicting views are finally settled by the Constitution Bench in Triveni Ben v State of
Gujarat.276. It overruled Vatheeswaran (supra) holding that undue long delay in
execution of the sentence of death will entitle the condemned person to approach the
Supreme Court under Article 32 but the Court will only examine the nature of delay
caused and circumstances that ensued after sentence will finally be confirmed by the
judicial process and will have no jurisdiction to reopen the conclusions reached by the
Court while finally maintaining the sentence of death. Court, however, may consider the
question of inordinate delay in the light of all circumstances of the case to decide
whether the execution of sentence should be carried out or should be altered into
imprisonment for life. No fixed period of delay could be held to make the sentence of
death inexecutable and to this extent the decision in Vatheeswaran's case cannot be
said to lay down the correct law. In Madhu Mehta v UOI,277. Supreme Court commuted
the death sentence on the ground that the mercy petition was pending for eight years
after disposal of the criminal appeal by Supreme Court.
It is well established that exercising of power under Article 72/161 by the President or
the Governor is a constitutional obligation and not a mere prerogative. Considering the
high status of office, the Constitutional framers did not stipulate any outer time limit for
disposing the mercy petitions under the said Articles, which means it should be
decided within reasonable time. However, when the delay caused in disposing the
mercy petitions is seen to be unreasonable, unexplained and exorbitant, it is the duty of
the Supreme Court to step in and consider this aspect.278.
[s 302.13.1] Nirbhaya Case279..—
In this case, the Supreme Court analysed all the decisions, where the question of
imposing the death penalty was discussed and examined the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances and opined that the appetite for sex, the hunger for violence,
the position of the empowered and the attitude of perversity of the accused, to say the
least, are bound to shock the collective conscience which knows not what to do.
The Supreme Court observed that:
the casual manner with which she was treated and devilish manner in which they played
with her identity and dignity is humanly inconceivable. It sounds like a story from different
world where humanity has been treated with irreverence. Aggravating circumstances
outweigh mitigating circumstances.
The Supreme Court held the accused persons guilty of offences which are brutal,
diabolic and barbaric in nature and fall within category of rarest of rare cases. The
Supreme Court held that the sentence of death penalty was proper; there was no
reason to differ with same.280.
[s 302.14] Mitigating factors.
At the material time, the accused was under influence of alcohol and the fact that his
mental faculty was not in order, was considered as a relevant mitigating circumstance.
It was accordingly held that it was not a fit case for extreme penalty. The sentence for
life imprisonment was confirmed.281.
There was a conspiracy in the wake of a property dispute in which contract killers were
hired and death was caused. Sethi, J, of the Supreme Court said that this was not the
rarest of rare case. The accused was a misled youth. He was liable to be sentenced to
life imprisonment for the major offence of murder.282. In a case arising out of partition
between two brothers, one of them (the accused) killed his brother, his wife and
children. He was frustrated over his failure to resist partition of joint property. The
Court agreed that it was a heinous and brutal crime, but was not in the category of
rarest of rare cases. The accused did not have any criminal tendency. He was a State
Government employee and not a menace to the society. The Court directed his death
sentence to be reduced to 20 years actual imprisonment including the period already
undergone.283.
In a rape and murder case of an 11-year-old child, there was extra judicial confession
made to a senior person to seek his help. He indicated the place where the body of the
girl was lying. He struck her in the head twice over with a brick and then in the mouth
only when she threatened to disclose. This showed that he had no intention to commit
murder and injuries were inflicted only at the spur of the moment. He had no criminal
record nor he was in any way a danger to the society. Death sentence was commuted
to life imprisonment.284.
The Court has to draw a balance between the aggravating and mitigating factors. The
accused in this case was the member of a para-military force. He killed seven
members of a family in a pre-planned manner. He was 23 at the time and had no
criminal record. He and his family members were suffering agony at the hands of the
victim family. He had a cause to feel aggrieved for the injustice meted out to his family
members. The Court said that it was not the rarest of rare cases. His death sentence
was reduced to life imprisonment.285.
[s 302.14.1] Where attribution of exact role not possible.—
One of the accused persons was the relative of the deceased family. They not only
merely robbed the family of valuables but also killed three members of the family who
were present at the time. They also raped the only female member in the house. The
mitigating factors which the judge took into account in commuting death sentence into
life imprisonment were that they were neither too old nor too young to be beyond
reformation and rehabilitation. It was difficult also to judge as to what part was played
by one or the other and, therefore, who among them would come in the "rarest"
category.286.
[s 302.14.2] Killing of wife and children in frustration.—
Though the accused had some suspicion about the character of his wife, the facts
showed that he killed his wife and children because of unhappiness and frustration and
not because of any criminal tendency. The penalty of death was set aside and he was
sentenced to life imprisonment.287. The accused requested his wife to accompany him
to his house. She turned it down. This created frustration and anger in his mind. He
picked up a sharp-edged weapon and mercilessly struck her and also his mother-in-law
repeatedly. Both of them fell dead. The Court said that the case was not of the rarest
category. Death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.288.
[s 302.14.3] Death in custody.—
The Supreme Court observed as follows:
There is a rise in incidents of custodial deaths but accused cannot be convicted
completely de hors the evidence and its admissibility according to law. Court cannot
act on presumption merely on a strong suspicion or assumption and presumption. A
presumption can only be drawn when it is permissible under the law. Rushing into
conclusions without there being any proper link with commission of crime is improper.
The view taken by the trial Court was just and proper in the given facts and
circumstances of the case and it was not proper for the High Court to reverse the
finding. Reasons given by the High Court in reversing the order of acquittal of accused
persons were not cogent and did not appeal to reason so as to justify conviction of the
appellants. Hence, impugned judgment of the High Court was set aside.289.
[s 302.14.4] Restoration of death penalty after acquittal.—
The trial Court awarded death sentence. The High Court acquitted the accused in 1982.
The Supreme Court said that the accused having enjoyed acquittal, death sentence
could not be restored even if the case merited the imposition of death penalty.290.
[s 302.15] Delay.—
No hard-and-fast rules can be laid down with respect to the delay which could result as
a mitigating circumstance, and each case must depend on its own facts. In the present
case, there was no delay whatsoever that the circumstances necessitated imposition
of life sentence instead of death sentence.291.
[s 302.16] Capital (Death) sentence.—
The doctrine of rarest of rare case was enunciated by the Supreme Court in Bachan
Singh v State of Punjab.292. The trial Court, High Courts and even the Supreme Court
are duty bound to follow it.293. The Court explained in this case some of the relevant
factors as follows:
Not only the doctrine of proportionality but also doctrine of rehabilitation should be
taken into consideration, particularly in view of section 354(3), Cr PC, 1973, which must
be read with Article 21 of the Constitution. Where there was nothing to show that the
appellant-accused could not be reformed and rehabilitated, the mere manner of
disposal of the dead body, howsoever abhorrent, should not by itself be regarded
sufficient to bring the case in the rarest of rare category. In the present case, all the
accused including the appellant were unemployed young men in search of job. They
were not criminals. In exception of a plan proposed by the appellant and accepted by
them, they kidnapped a friend of theirs with the motive of procuring ransom from his
family but later murdered him, and after cutting his body into pieces, disposed of the
same at different places. One of the accuseds turned approver and prosecution case
was based exclusively on his evidence. Appellant-accused contradicted the approver's
version in respect of his role. In such a case, statement of approver regarding manner
of murder and role of accused and that of approver himself, should be tested on the
basis of prudence doctrine taking into consideration inter alia, evidence produced by
the accused for imposition of lesser punishment. Hence, death penalty awarded by the
Courts below, in the absence of any special reasons to support the same was
substituted by penalty of rigorous imprisonment for life.
Death punishment stands on a very different footing from other types of punishments.
It is unique in its total irrevocability. Incarceration, life or otherwise, potentially serves
more than one sentencing aims. Deterrence, incapacitation, rehabilitation and
retribution all ends are capable to be furthered in different degrees, by calibrating this
punishment in light of the overarching penal policy. But the same does not hold true of
death penalty.294.
One has to observe the global move away from the death penalty. Latest statistics
show that 138 nations have abolished death penalty in either law or practice (no
executions for 10 years).
Further, on 18 December 2007, the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 62/149
calling upon countries that retain death penalty to establish a worldwide moratorium on
executions with a view to abolishing the death penalty. India is, however, one of the 59
nations that retain the death penalty.295.
The Law Commission of India in its Report No. 262 titled "The Death Penalty" has
recommended the abolition of death penalty for all the crimes other than terrorism
related offences and waging war (offences affecting National Security).
Where the question of whether death penalty could be imposed in a case which
depended upon circumstantial evidence, the Supreme Court said:
If the circumstantial evidence is found to be of unimpeachable character in
establishing the guilt of the accused, that form the foundation for conviction and that
has nothing to do with the question of sentence. Mitigating circumstances and the
aggravating circumstances have to be balanced and in the balance sheet of such
circumstances. The fact that the case rests on circumstantial evidence has no role to
play. In fact, in most of the cases where death sentences are awarded for rape and
murder and the like, there is practically no scope for getting an eyewitness. Such
offences are not committed in public view. Only available evidence in such cases is
circumstantial. If such evidence is found to be credible, cogent and trustworthy for the
purpose of recording conviction, to treat such evidence as a mitigating circumstance,
would amount to consideration of an irrelevant aspect. Hence, such plea is
unsustainable. Instant case fell in category of the rarest of rare cases. Circumstances
proved established the depraved acts of the accused, and they called for only one
sentence, that is, death sentence. Judgment of the High Court, confirming the
conviction and sentence imposed by the trial Court, does not warrant any
interference.296.
[s 302.16.1] Punishment of terrorists.—
The prosecution case was that the accused persons came running to a police picket
and hurled bombs at security personnel. There was good identification evidence.
Injuries on the persons of the accused were scabbed burn injuries caused by handling
of explosive substance. The medical evidence showed that abrasions on the body of
the deceased could have been caused by splinters from bomb explosions. The case
being proved beyond any reasonable doubt, the conviction for murder was fully
justified.297.
[s 302.16.2] Hearing before awarding death sentence.—
The matter was remitted where death sentence was awarded without hearing the
accused.298. It is necessary to afford opportunity of hearing to the accused on the
question of sentence, where life imprisonment or death sentence is awarded.299.
[s 302.17] Fine.—
It has been held that the words "shall also be liable to fine" are not to be understood as
a legislative mandate that the Court must invariably impose fine also as a part of the
punishment.300.
[s 302.18] Appeal against acquittal.—
Where the prosecution case of homicide and the defence version of suicide were both
found to be equally probable, the accused was held to be entitled to the benefit of
doubt.301. Where there was a gross enmity between the parties and the medical
evidence did not support the ocular version, accused was given benefit of doubt.302.
[s 302.19] Presumption of murder.—
Where the question was whether the death in question was homicidal or suicidal, and
the expert who examined the body was not sure either way, the presumption as to
murder was held to be something doubtful.303. Where a person is not proved to be
guilty, the presumption of innocence prevails in reference to him.304.
[s 302.20] As to the application of section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872.—
In cases where mere circumstantial evidence exists, the burden of proof as envisaged
under section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872, i.e., the burden of proving the fact, which
is especially within the knowledge of a person, plays an important role in several cases.
Where the dead body of the deceased was found in the river, the knowledge about that
incident was within the special knowledge of the accused. As the deceased was in the
custody of the accused and disappeared from their house, the accused did not reveal
what happened to the deceased. The Supreme Court held that the accused failed to
discharge their duty under section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872. The prosecution is
not expected to give the exact manner in which the deceased was killed. Adverse
inference needs to be drawn against the accused, as they failed to explain how the
deceased was found dead in the river in one-foot deep water.
Referring to section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872, it was propounded that the said
section was not intended to relieve the prosecution of its burden to prove the guilt of
the accused beyond reasonable doubt, but would apply to cases where prosecution
had succeeded in proving facts from which a reasonable inference could be drawn
regarding the existence of certain other facts, unless the accused, by virtue of his
special knowledge regarding such facts, succeeds in offering any explanation, to drive
the Court to draw a different inference.305.
In Gajanan Dashrath Kharate v State of Maharashtra,306. the deceased was found within
the company of the accused and on the next day was found dead. Blood stained dress
of the accused with the blood of the deceased was recovered. The Supreme Court held
that when an offence like murder is committed in secrecy inside a house, the initial
burden to establish the case would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution. In view of
section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872, there will be a corresponding burden on the
inmates of the house to give cogent explanation as to how the crime was committed.
When the deceased is shown to be abducted, it is for the abductors to explain how they
dealt with the abducted victim. In the absence of an explanation, the Court is to draw
inference that the abductors are the murderers.307.
In the examination under section 313, Cr PC, 1973, the accused denied any knowledge
of the crime and alleged false implication. Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872
imposes an obligation on the accused to explain as to what happened after they were
last seen together.308.
The mere circumstance that the accused was last seen with the deceased is an unsafe
hypothesis to find a conviction on a charge of murder. The lapse of time between the
point when the accused was last seen with the deceased and the time of death has to
be minimal.309. When the prosecution mainly relies on section 106 of the Evidence
Act,1872, the Supreme Court held, in a case where murder took place in a hotel room,
that to invoke that section, the main point to be established by the prosecution is that
the accused persons were present in the hotel room at the relevant time. In this case,
the prosecution failed to produce the CCTV footages available at the hotel where the
murder took place, the Court further observed that the CCTV footage being a crucial
piece of evidence, it is for the prosecution to have produced the best evidence, which
was missing.310.
In the absence of any persuasive evidence to hold that at the relevant time the
appellant was present in the house, it would also be impermissible to cast any burden
on him as contemplated under section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872.311.
[s 302.21] Expert opinion.—
Merely because no expert opinion was obtained to prove as to whether bones
recovered were human or animal bones, it would not weaken the case of prosecution in
the light of the overwhelming evidence available on record to prove the complicity of
the appellants.312.
[s 302.22] Circumstantial evidence.—
The circumstance (that the accused persons were seen in the vicinity of the
neighbourhood of the crime little before the same was committed), if coupled with the
recovery of the ornaments of the deceased from the possession of the accused, at
best, create a highly suspicious situation; but beyond a strong suspicion nothing else
would follow in the absence of any other circumstance(s) which could suggest the
involvement of the accused in the offence/offences alleged. Even with the aid of the
presumption under section 114 of the Evidence Act, 1872, the charge of murder cannot
be brought home unless there is some evidence to show that the robbery and murder
occurred at the same time, i.e., in the course of the same transaction.313.
[s 302.23] Section 302 and section 396.—
The law clearly marks a distinction between culpable homicide amounting to murder
and culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Another distinction between sections
302 and 396 is that under the latter, wide discretion is vested in the Courts in relation to
awarding of punishment. The Court, in exercise of its jurisdiction and judicial discretion
in consonance with the established principles of law can award sentence of 10 years
with fine or even award sentence of life imprisonment or sentence of death, as the case
may be. While under section 302, the Court cannot, in its discretion, award sentence
lesser than life imprisonment. The ingredients of both these offences, to some extent,
are also different inasmuch as to complete an offence of 'dacoity'. Under section 396,
IPC, 1860, five or more persons must conjointly commit the robbery while under section
302 of the IPC, 1860 even one person by himself can commit the offence of murder.
But, as already noticed, to attract the provisions of section 396, the offence of 'dacoity'
must be coupled with murder. In other words, the ingredients of section 302 becomes
an integral part of the offences punishable under section 396 of the IPC, 1860.314.
[s 302.24] Additional/alternate charge under section 302, prejudice caused.—
Charges were framed under sections 306 and 364. After examination of all the
witnesses (26) except the investigating officer, an alternate charge was framed under
section 302 and the accused convicted thereunder. The witnesses were cross-
examined as to the allegations related to the offences under sections 306 and 364.
Conviction under section 302 set aside as prejudiced.315.
196. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, section 117 and Sch, for "transportation for life" (w.e.f. 1-1-1956).
197. Ajitsingh Harnamsingh Gujral v State of Maharashtra, 2011 (10) Scale 394 [LNIND 2011 SC
902] : 2011 AIR (SCW) 5448 : AIR 2011 SC 3690 [LNIND 2011 SC 902] ; Rajesh Kumar v State,
2011 (11) Scale 182 [LNIND 2011 SC 2734] : 2011 AIR (SCW) 5997 : (2011) 13 SCC 706 [LNIND
2011 SC 2734] .
198. Nawab Singh v State of UP, AIR 1954 SC 278 .
199. Vadivelu Thevar v State of Madras, AIR 1957 SC 614 [LNIND 1957 SC 41] .
200. Jagmohan Singh v State of UP, (1973) 1 SCC 20 [LNIND 1972 SC 477] .
201. Rajendra Prasad v State of UP, (1979) 3 SCR 646 .
202. McGoutha v California, (1971) 402 US 183.
203. Furman v Georgia (1972) 408 US 238.
204. Jagmohan Singh v State of UP, (1973) 1 SCC 20 [LNIND 1972 SC 477] .
205. Sunder v State, AIR 2013 SC 777 [LNIND 2013 SC 91] : 2013 (3) SCC 215 [LNIND 2013 SC
91] .
206. Santa Singh v State of Punjab, (1976) 4 SCC 190 [LNIND 1976 SC 268] .
207. Bachan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1980 SC 898 [LNIND 1980 SC 260] : (1980) 2 SCC 684
[LNIND 1980 SC 261] .
208. Bachan Singh v State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 [LNIND 1980 SC 261] : AIR 1980 SC 898
[LNIND 1980 SC 260] .
209. Machhi Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1983 (3) SCC 470 [LNIND 1983 SC 170] : AIR 1983 SC
957 [LNIND 1983 SC 170] .
210. See the Box with 'Supreme Court Guidelines in Machi Singh'.
211. Sangeet v State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC 447 [LNIND 2012 SC 719] : (2013) 2 SCC 452
[LNIND 2012 SC 719] .
212. Machhi Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1983 SC 957 [LNIND 1983 SC 170] : 1983 (3) SCC 470
[LNIND 1983 SC 170] .
213. Vasanta Sampat Dupare v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2017 SC 2530 [LNIND 2017 SC 248] .
214. Ramnaresh v State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2012 SC 1357 [LNINDORD 2012 SC 404] .
215. Brajendra Singh v State of MP, AIR 2012 SC 1552 [LNIND 2012 SC 159] .
216. Machhi Singh v State of Punjab, (1983) 3 SCC 470 [LNIND 1983 SC 170] : AIR 1983 SC 957
[LNIND 1983 SC 170] : 1983 Cr LJ 1457 . See also State of Punjab v Garmej Shing, 2002 Cr LJ
3741 (SC), where also the court counted the factors and gave some illustrations. The accused
killed his brother and two members of his family. The incident was the result of a mistrust
created by a payment made by accused to his brother. The court was of the view that it was not
a rarest case and death penalty was improper. The court also said that the likelihood of the
accused being released prematurely was not a ground for imposing death penalty. The amount
of compensation to the victim should not exceed the fine imposed. The only surviving member
was the daughter of the deceased. The amount of fine was enhanced from Rs. 5000 to Rs.
20,000.
217. Jagmohan Singh, 1973 Cr LJ 370 : AIR 1973 SC 947 [LNIND 1972 SC 477] ; Mohinder Singh,
1973 Cr LJ 610 : AIR 1973 SC 697 ; Maghar Singh v State, 1975 Cr LJ 1102 : AIR 1975 SC 1320 .
218. Gopal Chand Srivastava v State of UP, 1994 Cr LJ 2863 (All), all the inmates were told to
stay away and the victims were then hit by two assailants whom the court awarded death
sentence but the confirming court reduced the sentence to life imprisonment in view of their
young years.
219. Ramesh, 1979 Cr LJ 902 : AIR 1979 SC 871 .
220. State of UP v Paras Nath, 1973 Cr LJ 850 : AIR 1973 SC 1073 [LNIND 1973 SC 14] .
221. Munawar Harun Shah, 1983 Cr LJ 971 : AIR 1983 SC 585 [LNIND 1983 SC 113] : (1983) 3
SCC 254 . Followed in State v Ashok Kumar, (1995) 2 Cr LJ 1789 (Del), where the accused killed
the husband of the woman with whom he was in love; the killing was done when he was taken
away with the help of his wife and was struck while asleep, both convicted and sentenced to
death; fine of one lakh rupees imposed on the lady accused for expenses of prosecution she
had gained anything from the offence nor had any means. Suresh Kumar v State of Rajasthan,
1995 Cr LJ 1853 (Raj), a boy of 20 years old, caused death of his wife and daughter, faced
prosecution for seven years, life imprisonment not enhanced to death sentence. James v State
of Kerala, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 55 (Ker), money-lender entered the home of the borrower and killed
him, his wife and his mother, entry could have been for the lawful purpose of seeking repayment,
death sentence reduced to life imprisonment, not rarest of rare case.
222. Shankaria, 1978 Cr LJ 1251 : AIR 1978 SC 1248 [LNIND 1978 SC 138] . Raghunathan v State
of Kerala, (1995) 2 Cr LJ 1880 (Ker), death of old woman caused by strangulation and robbed of
ornaments, life imprisonment upheld. Sheikh Ayyub v State of Maharashtra, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 420 :
(1994) 2 Supp SCC 269 , accused killed two police officers while they were arresting him, he
snatched police pistol and handled it in confused manner, injuring his companion co-accused
also, death sentence reduced to life imprisonment. Deoraj Deju Suvarna v State of Maharashtra,
1994 Cr LJ 3602 (Bom), it would be most shocking for a judge to hear the accused on the
quantum of sentence after awarding him death sentence.
223. (2008) 13 SCC 767 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : AIR 2008 SC 3040 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] :
2008 Cr LJ 3911 . The Court also observed that decision would go by comparison of one case
with the other, comparison both quantitative and qualitative. The application of the sentencing
policy through aggravating and mitigating circumstances came up for consideration in Swamy
Shraddananda (2) v State of Karnataka, 2008 (13) SCC 767 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : AIR 2008 SC
3040 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : 2008 Cr LJ 3911 . On a review, it was concluded in paragraph 48
of the Report that there is a lack of evenness in the sentencing process. The rarest of rare
principle has not been followed uniformly or consistently. Reference in this context was made
to Aloke Nath Dutta v State of WB, 2007 (12) SCC 230 [LNIND 2006 SC 1131] : 2007 (51) AIC 429
(SC) : 2008 (2) SCC (Cri) 264 [LNIND 2006 SC 1131] , which in turn referred to several earlier
decisions to bring home the point.
224. Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v State of Maharashtra, 2009 (6) SCC 498 [LNIND
2009 SC 1278] : 2009 (2) SCC (Cr) 1149 : 2009 (79) AIC 26 : 2009 (7) Scale 341 [LNIND 2009 SC
1278] .
225. Shivaji @ Dadya Shankar Alhat v State of Maharashtra, 2008 (15) SCC 269 [LNIND 2008 SC
1785] .
226. Mohan Anna Chavan v State of Maharashtra, 2008 (7) SCC 561 [LNIND 2008 SC 1265] .
227. Bantu v State of UP, 2008 (11) SCC 113 [LNIND 2008 SC 1496] .
228. Surja Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1996 (6) SCC 271 [LNIND 1996 SC 1548] .
229. Dayanidhi Bisoi v State of Orissa, 2003 (9) SCC 310 [LNIND 2003 SC 571] .
230. State of UP v Sattan @ Satyendra, 2009 (4) SCC 736 [LNIND 2009 SC 485] .
231. Sangeet v State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC 447 [LNIND 2012 SC 719] : (2013) 2 SCC 452
[LNIND 2012 SC 719] .
232. Sangeet v State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC 447 [LNIND 2012 SC 719] : (2013) 2 SCC 452
[LNIND 2012 SC 719] .
233. Mohinder Singh v State of Punjab, (2013) 3 SCC 294 [LNIND 2013 SC 71] : 2013 Cr LJ 1559
(SC).
234. Swamy Shraddananda @ Murali Manohar Mishra v State of Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767
[LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : AIR 2008 SC 3040 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : 2008 Cr LJ 3911 .
235. Santosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v State of Maharashtra, 2009 (6) SCC 498 [LNIND
2009 SC 1278] : 2009 (2) SCC (Cr) 1149 : 2009 (79) AIC 26 : 2009 (7) Scale 341 [LNIND 2009 SC
1278] .
236. Mohd Farooq Abdul Gafur v State of Maharashtra, 2010 (14) SCC 641 [LNIND 2009 SC
1641] .
237. Haresh Mohandas Rajput v State of Maharashtra, 2011 (12) SCC 56 [LNIND 2011 SC 928] .
238. State of Maharashtra v Goraksha Ambaji Adsul, AIR 2011 SC 2689 [LNIND 2011 SC 627] .
239. Mohammed Ajmal Mohammadamir Kasab @ Abu Mujahid v State of Maharashtra, JT 2012
(8) SC 4 [LNIND 2012 SC 1215] .
240. See the Box with 'Principles summarised in Mohinder Singh's Case by Supreme Court'.
241. Ravji @ Ram Chandra v State of Rajasthan, 1996 (2) SCC 175 [LNIND 1995 SC 1247] .
242. Shivaji @ Dadya Shankar Alhat v State of Maharashtra, 2008 (15) SCC 269 [LNIND 2008 SC
1785] .
243. Mohan Anna Chavan v State of Maharashtra, 2008 (7) SCC 561 [LNIND 2008 SC 1265] .
244. Bantu v State of UP, 2008 (11) SCC 113 [LNIND 2008 SC 1496] .
245. Surja Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1996 (6) SCC 271 [LNIND 1996 SC 1548] .
246. Dayanidhi Bisoi v State of Orissa,246 2003 (9) SCC 310 [LNIND 2003 SC 571] .
247. State of UP v Sattan @ Satyendra and Others, 2009 (4) SCC 736 [LNIND 2009 SC 485] .
248. Mohd Farooq Abdul Gafur v State of Maharashtra, 2010 (14) SCC 641 [LNIND 2009 SC
1641] , 692.
249. Haresh Mohandas Rajput v State of Maharashtra, 2011 (12) SCC 56 [LNIND 2011 SC 928] at
p 63, para 20.
250. State of Maharashtra v Goraksha Ambaji Adsul, AIR 2011 SC 2689 [LNIND 2011 SC 627] .
251. Mohinder Singh v State of Punjab, (2013) 3 SCC 294 [LNIND 2013 SC 71] : 2013 Cr LJ 1559
(SC).
252. Shankar Kisanrao Khade v State of Maharashtra, 2013 Cr LJ 2595 (SC) : (2013) 5 SCC 546
[LNIND 2013 SC 429] . Gurvail Singh @ Gala v State of Punjab, AIR 2013 SC 1177 [LNIND 2013 SC
94] .
253. Kumudi Lal v State of UP, (1994) 4 SCC 108 .
254. Raju v State of Haryana, (2001) 9 SCC 50 [LNIND 2001 SC 1147] .
255. Bantu @ Naresh Giri v State of MP, (2001) 9 SCC 615 [LNIND 2001 SC 2372] .
256. State of Maharashtra v Suresh, (2000) 1 SCC 471 [LNIND 1999 SC 1126] .
257. Amrit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2007 SC 132 [LNIND 2006 SC 944] .
258. Rameshbhai Chandubhai Rathod v State of Gujarat, (2011) 2 SCC 764 [LNIND 2011 SC 96] .
259. Surendra Pal Shivbalak v State of Gujarat, (2005) 3 SCC 127 .
260. Amit v State of Maharashtra, (2003) 8 SCC 93 [LNIND 2003 SC 642] .
261. Swamy Shraddananda (2) v State of Karnataka, 2008 (13) SCC 767 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] :
AIR 2008 SC 3040 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : 2008 Cr LJ 3911 ; also see State of UP v Sanjay
Kumar, (2012) 8 SCC 537 [LNINDORD 2012 SC 416] .
262. Sangeet v State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC 447 [LNIND 2012 SC 719] : (2013) 2 SCC 452
[LNIND 2012 SC 719] : 2013 Cr LJ 425 .
263. Sahib Hussain @ Sahib Jan v State of Rajasthan, 2013 Cr LJ 2359 : 2013 (6) Scale 219
[LNIND 2013 SC 474] .
264. Gurvail Singh @ Gala v State of Punjab, 2013 (10) Scale 671 [LNINDORD 2013 SC 1147] .
265. Sangeet v State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC 447 [LNIND 2012 SC 719] : (2013) 2 SCC 452
[LNIND 2012 SC 719] : 2013 Cr LJ 425 .
266. State of Rajasthan v Jamil Khan, 2013 (12) Scale 200 [LNIND 2013 SC 883] .
267. Swamy Shraddananda (2) v State of Karnataka, 2008 (13) SCC 767 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] :
AIR 2008 SC 3040 [LNIND 2008 SC 1488] : 2008 Cr LJ 3911 .
268. Unni v State of Kerala, 2013 Cr LJ 2819 (SC).
269. Shatrughan Chauhan v UOI, 2014 Cr LJ 1327 : [2014] 1 SCR 609 [LNIND 2014 SC 40] .
270. Mohd Arif v The Registrar, Supreme Court of India, 2014 Cr LJ 4598 : 2014 (87) All CC 939.
271. TV Vatheeswaran, AIR 1983 SC 361 [LNIND 1983 SC 43] , 1983 SCR (2) 348 .
272. Triveni Ben v State of Gujarat, AIR 1989 SC 1335 [LNIND 1989 SC 885] : (1989) 1 SCC 678
[LNIND 1989 SC 885] .
273. In Ediga Annamma's case (1974 (3) SCR 329) [LNIND 1974 SC 34] , two years was
considered sufficient to justify interference with the sentence of death. In Bhagwan Baux's case
(AI R 1978 SC 34 ), two and a half years and in Sadhu Singh's case ( AIR 1978 SC 1506 ), three
and a half years were taken as sufficient to justify altering the sentence of death into one of
imprisonment for life; see also KP Mohammed v State of Kerala, (1985) 1 SCC (Cr) 142 : 1984
Supp SCC 684.
274. Sher Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1983 SC 465 [LNIND 1983 SC 89] : (1983) 2 SCC 344
[LNIND 1983 SC 89] .
275. Javed Ahmed v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1985 SC 231 [LNIND 1984 SC 310] : (1985) 1 SCC
275 [LNIND 1984 SC 310] .
276. Triveni Ben v State of Gujarat, AIR 1989 SC 1335 [LNIND 1989 SC 885] : (1989) 1 SCC 678
[LNIND 1989 SC 885] .
277. Madhu Mehta v UOI, (1989) 3 SCR 775 [LNIND 1989 SC 390] .
278. Shatrughan Chauhan v UOI, 2014 Cr LJ 1327 : [2014] 1 SCR 609 [LNIND 2014 SC 40] .
279. Mukesh v State for NCT of Delhi, 2017 (5) Scale 506 .
280. Mukesh v State for NCT of Delhi, AIR 2017 SC 2161 [LNIND 2017 SC 252] .
281. Siraj Khan v State of Gujarat, 1994 Cr LJ 1502 (Guj). Kurale Pullaiah v State, 2003 Cr LJ 1060
(AP), the accused stabbed the victim with knife, snatching the knife from the victim himself,
inflicted only one stab injury, not a cold-blooded or heartless homicide, death sentence
converted into life imprisonment.
282. State of Maharashtra v Bharat Chaganlal Raghani, AIR 2002 SC 409 [LNIND 2001 SC 1312]
at 432.
283. Prakash Dhawal Khairnar v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 340 [LNIND 2001 SC 2841] at
350, relying on Bhagwan v State of Rajasthan, 2001 AIR SCW 2189 : AIR 2001 SC 2342 [LNIND
2001 SC 1234] : (2001) Cr LJ 2925 : (2001) 6 SCC 2961 , wherein while reducing the death
sentence to imprisonment for life, the court considered section 57, IPC, 1860 and referred to the
following observation in Dalbir Singh v State of Punjab, (1979) 3 SCC 745 [LNIND 1979 SC 281] :
AIR 1979 SC 1384 [LNIND 1979 SC 281] : 1979 Cr LJ 1058 .
"The sentences of death in the present appeal are liable to be reduced to life imprisonment. We
may add a footnote to the ruling in Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P., (1979) 3 SCC 646 [LNIND
1979 SC 107] .Taking the clue from the English Legislation on abolition, we may suggest that life
imprisonment which strictly means imprisonment for the whole of the man's life, but in practice
amounts to incarceration for a period between 10 and 14 years may, at the option of the
convicting Court, be subject to the conditions that the sentence of imprisonment shall last as
long as life lasts where there are exceptional indications of murderous recidivism and the
community cannot run the risk of the convict being at large. This takes care of judicial
apprehensions that unless physically liquidated the culprit may at some remote time repeat
murder." This should be contrasted with Surja Ram v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 18 [LNIND
1996 SC 1548] : 1997 Cr LJ 51 , the accused killed his real brother, his two minor sons, and aunt
while asleep, also attempted to murder the brother's wife and daughter, deaths caused in cool
and calculated manner, rarest, death sentence justified. Bantu v State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 70
[LNIND 2001 SC 2372] : 2002 Cr LJ 211 , the accused was sentenced to death for rape and
murder of six-year-old child. He was of 22 years. There was no criminal record. He was not likely
to be a grave danger to the society. His act, though heinous and condemnable, did not come in
the category of rarest of rare cases. Death sentence was commuted to imprisonment for life.
This should be contrasted with Jai Kumar v State of MP, AIR 1999 SC 1860 [LNIND 1999 SC 524]
: 1999 Cr LJ 2569 . The accused committed a cold-blooded and gruesome and brutal murder of
his sister-in-law and her eight-year-old daughter without any provocation. The Court did not
regard his age of 22 years as any relevant factor. Death penalty was confirmed. Deepak Kumar v
Ravi Virmani, 2002 Cr LJ 1781 (SC) : AIR 2002 SC 1320 [LNIND 2002 SC 1] , death sentence
reduced to life imprisonment in a case in which there was heinous killing of four family
members. The accused spared a child which showed humane conduct.
284. Raju v State of Haryana, AIR 2001 SC 2043 [LNIND 2001 SC 1147] .
285. Om Prakash v State of Haryana, AIR 1999 SC 1332 [LNIND 1999 SC 1282] : 1999 Cr LJ
2044 . Another case stressing the need for balancing process is Anil v State of UP, 2002 Cr LJ
2694 (All), the accused had his shop opposite a house. The house owner had the shop closed
because of customer nuisance. The accused in revenge got him killed. Taking all the factors
into account, the court said that he would not pose any danger to the society if his life was
spared. The death sentence awarded to him was reduced to life imprisonment.
286. Ronny v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1998 SC 1251 [LNIND 1998 SC 302] : 1998 Cr LJ 1638 .
State of UP v Mutahir Mian, (2008) 10 SCC 223 [LNIND 2008 SC 1922] : AIR 2009 SC 839 [LNIND
2008 SC 1922] , acquittal because of irreconciliable facts. State of MP v Chamru, (2007) 12 SCC
423 [LNIND 2007 SC 802] : AIR 2007 SC 2400 [LNIND 2007 SC 802] : 2007 Cr LJ 3509 , four
murders, nobody could be punished because witnesses not natural. State of MP v Basodi, (2007)
14 SCC 548 [LNIND 2007 SC 919] , killing alleged by uncle by gunshot, extra-judicial confession
found to be myth, acquittal. Ramappa Halappa Pujar v State of Karnataka, (2007) 13 SCC 31
[LNIND 2007 SC 561] , High Court reversed acquittal, Supreme Court upheld conviction. State of
UP v Atar Singh, (2007) 14 SCC 193 [LNIND 2007 SC 1316] : AIR 2008 SC 411 [LNIND 2007 SC
1316] : (2008) 1 All LJ 227, acquittal justified because of weakness of circumstantial evidence.
Jagdish v State of MP, (2007) 13 SCC 12 [LNIND 2007 SC 1091] : 2008 Cr LJ 350 , acquittal
justified on appreciation of evidence. Bhagga v State of MP, (2007) 13 SCC 442 [LNIND 2007 SC
1208] : AIR 2008 SC 175 [LNIND 2007 SC 1208] , accused to whom no overt act could be
attributed, acquitted, no common object. Ajay Singh v State of Maharashtra, (2007) 12 SCC 341
[LNIND 2007 SC 438] : AIR 2007 SC 2188 [LNIND 2007 SC 438] , bride burning, prosecution
failed to establish charge.
287. Shaikh Ayub v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1999 SC 1285 : 1998 Cr LJ 1656 ; Heera Lal (Dr) v
State of UP, 2001 Cr LJ 2849 (All), killed wife and three children because of debt burden and
attempted suicide. He was in great stress, frustration and mentally disturbed. Death sentence
reduced to life imprisonment.
288. Mani Ram v State of Uttaranchal, 2001 Cr LJ 3403 (Uttaranchal).
289. Sadashio Mundaji Bhalerao v State of Maharashtra, (2007) 15 SCC 421 [LNIND 2006 SC
1047] .
290. State of MP v Dhirendra Kumar, AIR 1997 SC 318 [LNIND 1996 SC 1830] : (1997) 1 SCC 93
[LNIND 1996 SC 1830] ; Subhash Chander v Krishanlal, 2001 Cr LJ 1825 (SC), refusal to interfere
in the commutation of death sentence into life imprisonment by High Court.
291. Jagdish v State of MP, (2009) 9 SCC 495 [LNINDORD 2009 SC 210] : (2009) 4 AP LJ 1 .