Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant.
When property is in the possession of a person's wife, clerk or servant, on account of
that person, it is in that person's possession within the meaning of this Code.
Explanation.— A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the
capacity of a clerk or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this section.
COMMENT—
Under this section property in the possession of a person's wife, clerk, or servant, is
deemed to be in that person's possession. The possession must be conscious and
intelligent possession and not merely the physical presence of the accused near the
object.141.
Corporeal property is in a person's possession when he has such power over it that he
can exclude others from it, and intends to exercise, if necessary, that power on behalf
of himself or of some person for whom he is a trustee.
A man's goods are in his possession not only while they are in his house or on his
premises, but also when they are in a place where he may usually send them (as when
horses and cattle feed on common land), or in a place where they may be lawfully
deposited by him, e.g., when he buries money or ornaments in his own land, or puts
them in any other secret place of deposit.
1. 'Wife'.—A permanent mistress may be regarded as a 'wife'. When a man furnishes a
house for his mistress' occupation, he may reasonably be presumed to be in
possession of all articles therein which can reasonably be inferred to belong to him or
to be in possession of his mistress on his behalf. But the inference must be
inapplicable to articles of which the mistress is in possession illegally or contrary to the
provisions of law, especially when the article in question is such that he might well
remain in ignorance that it was in his mistress' possession.142.
Under this section the possession of the wife or servant must be shown to be on
account of the accused otherwise he cannot be held liable for possession by his wife
or servant of any incriminatory thing even in his own house. In other words, it must be
shown that the accused was in conscious possession of the thing in question through
his wife or servant. Moreover, it must also be shown that the possession of the
incriminatory thing amounted to an offence under the Indian Penal Code. Thus,
possession of illicit liquor or an unlicenced pistol by the wife of the accused in his
house would not make him liable for an offence under the Prohibition Act or the Arms
Act. The mere fact that the accused was the head of the family would not go to show
that the accused must have been in conscious possession of the incriminatory
thing.143.
141. Wahib Basha, AIR 1961 Mad 162 [LNIND 1960 MAD 38] .
142. Banwari Lal, (1913) PR No. 20 of 1914; see also Narendra Nath Majumdar, AIR 1951 Cal
140 [LNIND 1951 CAL 14] ; Dharam Singh, 1961 Cr LJ 152 (Pun) where the wife alone was held
responsible as she produced the key.
143. Chela Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1984 Cr LJ 17 .1143 (Raj); Narendra Nath Majumdar, AIR
1951 Cal 140 [LNIND 1951 CAL 14] .