Personating a public servant.
Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public servant,1 knowing that he
does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such office,
and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act 2 under colour of such
office,3 shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
[s 170.1] Ingredients.—
The section requires two things—
1. A person (a) pretending to hold a particular office as a public servant, knowing
that he does not hold such office, or (b) falsely personating any other person
holding such office.
2. Such person in such assumed character must do or attempt to do an act under
colour of such office.
COMMENT—
Personating public servant.—Mere personation is not an offence under this section.
The person personating must do or attempt to do some act under colour of the office
of the public servant whom he personates. Section 140 punishes the person who
wears the garb or carries the token used by a soldier. This section punishes a person
who does any act in the assumed character of a public servant.
1. 'Pretends to hold any particular office as a public servant'.—It must be an existing
office. If it is uncertain who legally fills the office, a person doing an official act, in
pursuance of what he honestly believes to be his lawful title to the office, does not
come within this section.
2. 'Any act'.—It is not necessary that the act done or attempted to be done should be
such an act as might legally be done by the public servant personated. The accused
was arrested when he was demanding one anna's worth of fruit from a fruit-seller for
one pie on the representation that he was a head constable, which in fact he was not. It
was held that if he pretended to be a police-officer and tried as such police-officer to
extort money or things from a fruit-seller, he was guilty of an offence under this
section.16. A person who poses as a Government servant and by so doing obtains of
another's services, which he would not otherwise have obtained and which the other
person was bound to give on demand by a Government officer, commits an offence
under this section.17.
3. 'Under colour of such office'.—An act is done 'under colour of an office,' if it is an act
having some relation to the office, which the actor pretends to hold. If it has no relation
to the office, as if A pretending to be a servant of Government, travelling through a
district, obtains money, provisions, etc., the offence may amount to cheating under
section 415, but is not punishable under this section.18. The act done under colour of
office must be an act which could not have been done without assuming official
authority.
Where the accused posed as a police officer and in that garb looted certain articles
from the complainant and the stolen articles, one police ballot and monogram were
recovered from him, his conviction under the section was held to be proper.19.
[s 170.2] Retired IAS officer using IAS with his name.—
To constitute an offence under section 170, a person must either pretend to hold a
particular office as a public servant knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely
personate any other person holding such office. Over and above that, that person in
such assumed character must do or attempt to do an act under the colour of such
office. There must be pretension or false personation to be a particular person, that too
a public servant, which he is not, and then doing of or attempt to do some act under
colour of such office of that public servant, to proceed against a person under section
170 of the Indian Penal Code. Thus, where a retired IAS officer, had used IAS in his
letterhead when he continued as Director of CAPE and also corresponded in that
manner, is no ground to impute that he has committed an offence under section 170 of
the Penal Code.20.
16. Aziz-ud-din v State, (1904) All 294 .
17. Bashirullakhan, (1942) Nag 484. Ajitender Singh v State of Punjab, 2000 Cr LJ 1827 (P&H) :
2000 (2) RCR (Criminal) 34, mere assumption of the character of a public servant is not enough,
there must also be an attempt to commit an official act. Jata Shanker Jha v State of Rajasthan,
2000 Cr LJ 2108 (Raj) : 2000 (4) WLC 75 , accused personated as secret ASI in the Education
Department used forged papers to divert the salary of others to himself. Conviction. Pratap
Singh v State, 1998 Cr LJ 633 (P&H), acting under colour of office as Lambardar, offence under
the section made out because the accused identified parties in sale deeds as an officer and also
had certain sureties arrested.
18. M&M 142.
19. Karuna Krishna Biswas v State of WB, 1996 Cr LJ 2823 (Cal).
20. Premachandra Kurup v State, 2013 Cr LJ 1465 .