Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.
Whoever, being bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of any
person who, by reason of youth, or of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily
weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his own safety or of supplying his
own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both.
COMMENT.—
Object.—The authors of the Code say:
We also think that persons who contract to take care of infants of the sick and of the
helpless, lay themselves under an obligation of a very peculiar kind, and may with propriety
be punished if they omit to discharge their duty. The misery and distress which their neglect
may cause is such as the largest pecuniary payment would not repair; they generally come
from the lower ranks of life, and would be unable to pay anything. We, therefore, propose to
add to this class of contracts the sanction of the penal law.3.
[s 491.1] Ingredients.—This section requires:—
1. Binding of a person by a lawful contract.
2. Such contract must be to attend on or to supply the wants of a person who is
helpless or incapable of providing for his own safety or of supplying his own
wants by reason of
(i) youth; or
(ii) unsoundness of mind; or
(iii) disease; or
(iv) bodily weakness.
3. Voluntary omission to perform the contract by the person bound by it.
Under this section it is not the breach of contract towards the other party to the
contract that is to be regarded, but the breach of the legal obligation towards the
incapable person, which had been accepted and transferred by the contract.
[s 491.2] Ordinary servants do not come within this section.—
The accused, a cook, on a morning whilst the complainant's wife was ill and unable to
supply her wants, left his service without warning or permission. It was alleged that the
illness of the complainant's wife was aggravated thereby. It was held that the accused
was engaged only as an ordinary cook to a family, and was not bound to attend on, or
to supply the wants of, any helpless person, and that, therefore, this section did not
apply.4.
1. The Works of Lord Macaulay - Note P.
3. The Works of Lord Macaulay - Note P.
4. Vithu, (1892) (Unrep) CrC 608.