Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence.
When an offence is committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally co-
operates in the commission of that offence by doing any one of those acts, either
singly or jointly with any other person, commits that offence.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small
doses of poison. A and B administer the poison according to the agreement with
intent to murder Z. Z dies from the effects of the several doses of poison so
administered to him. Here A and B intentionally co-operate in the commission of
murder and as each of them does an act by which the death is caused, they are
both guilty of the offence though their acts are separate.
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner,
alternatively for six hours at a time. A and B, intending to cause Z's death,
knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by illegally omitting, each during the
time of his attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that purpose,
Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder of Z.
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z's death, illegally
omits to supply Z with food; in consequence of which Z is much reduced in
strength, but the starvation is not sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed
from his office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion or co-operation with A,
illegally omits to supply Z with food, knowing that he is likely thereby to cause
Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A did not co-operate
with B. A is guilty only of an attempt to commit murder.
COMMENT—
This section follows as a corollary from section 35 as appears from the illustrations. It
provides that, when several acts are done so as to result together in the commission of
an offence, the doing of any one of them, with an intention to co-operate in the offence
(which may not be the same as an intention common to all), makes the actor liable to
be punished for the commission of the offence.268. By co-operating in the doing of
several acts which together constitute a single criminal act, each person who co-
operates in the commission of that offence by doing any one of the acts is either singly
or jointly liable for that offence.269. If common intention is the hub of section 34,
intentional cooperation is the spindle of section 37 of the Penal Code. One who shares
common intention can as well cooperate in the commission of the offence
intentionally. In that sense the two sections are not contradictory to each other. The
former does not necessarily exclude the latter. Co-operation in the commission of the
offence need not be for the entire gamut of the offence committed. It is enough if he
cooperates in one of the several acts which constitute the offence. Sections 34–38 of
the Penal Code delineate the parameters of constructive or vicarious penal liability in
different situations. Therefore, it is not imperative that the charge should contain the
particular section of the Penal Code with which constructive liability is fastened.270.
268. Barendra Kumar Ghosh, (1924) 52 IA 40 : 52 Cal 197 : 211, 27 Bom LR 148.
269. Afrahim Sheikh v State of WB, AIR 1964 SC 1263 [LNIND 1964 SC 1] : 1964 (6) SCR 172
[LNIND 1964 SC 1] : 1964 Cr LJ 350 .
270. Justus v State, 1987 (2) KLT 330 [LNIND 1987 KER 337] : ILR 1988 (1) Ker 98 .