Negligent conduct with respect to animal.
Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any animal in his
possession 1 as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life, or
any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, 2 shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
COMMENT.—
This section deals with improper or careless management of animals. It does not refer
to savage animals alone, but to any 'animal', wild or domestic, e.g., a pony.93.
In the case of wild and savage animals, a savage or mischievous temper is presumed
to be known to their owner and to all men as a usual accompaniment of such animals;
and hence a positive duty is cast on the owner to protect the public against the
mischief resulting from such animals being at large. Anyone who keeps such a wild
animal as a tiger or bear, which escapes and does damage, is liable without any proof
of notice of the animal's ferocity; in such a case it may be said 'res ipsa loquitur'.
In the case of animals, which are tame and mild in their general temper, no mischievous
disposition is presumed. It must be shown that the defendant knew that the animal
was accustomed to do mischief. Some evidence must be given of the existence of an
abnormally vicious disposition. A single instance of ferocity, even a knowledge that it
has evinced a savage disposition, is held to be sufficient notice.94.
1. 'Animal in his possession'. Where the owner knowing that his buffalo was of a
savage and vicious disposition vis-a-vis human beings, negligently omitted to take such
order with the animal as was sufficient to guard against probable danger to human life
or any probable danger of grievous hurt, and the animal attacked the complainant in a
jungle and wounded him with her horn, it was held that he was guilty of an offence
under this section.95.
2. 'As is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life, or any probable
danger of grievous hurt from such animal'.—Where a pony, which was tied negligently,
got loose and ran through a crowded bazar, it was held that the conviction under this
section was good, because the pony on such an occasion might create danger to the
lives or limbs of men, women and children walking in the bazar.96. The accused, a
horse-keeper, harnessed his master's horse, put him into his carriage, and then went
away, leaving the horse and carriage standing in the road of the compound of his
master's house without any justification; it was held that the accused had committed
an offence under this section, since the horse was not the less in the actual possession
of the servant, because it was for some purpose in the constructive possession of his
master.97.
93. Chand Manal, (1872) 19 WR (Cr) 1.
94. See the authors' LAW OF TORTS, 19th Edn, chapter XX.
95. Moti, (1954) Nag 585.
96. Chand Manal, (1872) 19 WR (Cr) 1.
97. Natha Reva, (1881) Unrep Cr C 163.