Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty.
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge
of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or any
other public servant from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in
consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both.
COMMENT.—
This section resembles section 353. Under it there is causing of hurt to the public
servant, under section 353 there is assault or criminal force for the same purpose.
Ingredients of an offence under section 332 of IPC, 1860 are:
(1) hurt must have been caused to a public servant and
(2) it must have been caused—
(a) while such public servant was acting in the discharge of his duty as such,
or
(b) in order to prevent or deter him from discharging his duty as a public
servant or
(c) in consequence of his having done or attempted to do anything in the
lawful discharge of his duty as such a public servant.
Evidence necessary to establish an offence under section 332 of IPC, 1860 are:
(a) the accused voluntarily caused bodily pain, disease or infirmity to the victim (as
provided under section 321 of IPC, 1860),
(b) the victim of the hurt is a public servant, and
(c) at the time of causing of hurt, the public servant concerned was discharging his
duties qua public servant. An offence under section 332 of IPC, 1860 is attracted
if the accused voluntarily caused hurt to any person being a public servant in the
discharge of his duty. It is not necessary to establish further that hurt was
voluntarily caused to prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty as a
public servant. On the other hand, if hurt was voluntarily caused to a public
servant, while not discharging his duty as a public servant, it is necessary to
prove that hurt was caused with intent to prevent or deter that person or any
other public servant from discharging his duty. Alternatively, if hurt was
voluntarily caused to a public servant, while he was discharging his official duty
as such public servant, it is not necessary to establish further that it was so
caused with the intention to prevent or deter that person from discharging his
duty as such public servant. On the other hand, even if hurt was caused
voluntarily to a public servant, if he was not discharging his duty as a public
servant at that time, it is necessary to prove additionally that hurt was caused to
prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty as a public servant.869.
Where a public servant was assaulted due to an earlier private quarrel, the assault
having no causal connection with the duty of the public servant, the accused could not
be held liable under section 332 IPC, 1860. His conviction was, therefore, changed to
one under section 323 IPC, 1860.870.
Accused/appellant cut the hose pipe from the train and assaulted the complainant/
constable when he questioned the act. According to them, the accused/appellant and
other accused persons had gone to the extent of pulling down the complainant from
the train and when he was taken to the guardroom, they were shouting at him
threatening to throw him on the railway track. Offence was clearly made out.871.
Where the accused persons entered the premises of a government school and abused,
humiliated and voluntarily caused hurt to deter the Head Master of the school from his
duty and they abused the other teachers also, the Court did not interfere with their
conviction under section 332.872.
[s 332.1] Sentence.—
Accused, an under trial prisoner gave beatings to jail warden with a wooden plank on
head. He was a habitual offender and also involved in other cases. Injuries caused to
victim were grievous in nature. He also attacked other warden with sole object of
fleeing from prison. Trial Court exercised its judicial discretion to award maximum
punishment taking into consideration all relevant factors. Sentence imposed upon
appellant was held proper by the High Court.873.
869. Rajan v State, 2011 (4) Ker LJ 157 .
870. D Chattaiah, 1978 Cr LJ 1473 : AIR 1978 SC 1441 . Jhamman v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 2970
, refusal to give sample to a food Inspector.
871. Gyan Bahadur v State of MP, 2013 Cr LJ 1729 (MP).
872. Madhudas v State of Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 3595 (Raj).
873. Rakesh Rai v State of Sikkim, 2012 Cr LJ 4033 (SIK).