Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly.
Whoever hires or engages or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring,
engagement or employment of any person to join or become a member of any
unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such unlawful assembly, and
for any offence which may be committed by any such person as a member of such
unlawful assembly in pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the
same manner as if he had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had
committed such offence.
COMMENT—
This section brings within the reach of the law those who are really the originators and
instigators of the offences committed by hired persons. It deals with the case of those
who are neither abettors of nor participators in the offence committed by an unlawful
assembly.
The section creates a specific offence. It intends to embrace all those who hire,
promote or connive at the employment of persons and render them punishable as
principal participators. Under the section, a person, though not actually a member of an
unlawful assembly himself, may be held guilty of being a member of the assembly and
may be held liable for the offence which may be committed by the assembly to the
same extent as if he had himself committed that offence. But this is possible only
when it is found that he hired or engaged or employed or promoted or connived at the
hiring, engagement or employment by any other person to join or become a member of
the assembly. There must have been an unlawful assembly which was composed of
persons so hired, etc., and an offence committed in the course of that assembly for
which he becomes equally liable. The word "promotes" denotes acceleration or
inducement. Though the word "employ" or "employment" is used, it does not mean
recruitment. It would mean calling of the service of the hired person without any
recruitment as a servant or agent to commit the offence.163.
163. Vinit v State of Maharashtra, 1994 Cr LJ 1791 at pp 1804–1805, certain persons, who
constituted an unlawful assembly, were hired to eliminate a particular person. The eliminators
and their procurer were both held equally liable.