Punishment for rape.—
(1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section (2), commits rape, shall
be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which
1205.[shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine].
(2) Whoever,—
(a) being a police officer, commits rape—
(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is
appointed; or
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or
(iii) on a woman in such police officer's custody or in the custody of a
police
officer subordinate to such police officer; or
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public
servant's custody or in the custody of a public servant subordinate to
such public servant; or
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in area by the Central or a
State Government commits rape in such area; or
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other
place of custody established by or under any law for the time being in
force or of a women's or children's institution, commits rape on any
inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on
a woman in that hospital; or
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust
or authority towards the woman, commits rape on such woman; or
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or
(h) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or 1206.[* * *]
(j) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or
(k) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape
on such woman; or
(l) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or
(m) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or
disfigures or endangers the life of a woman; or
(n) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman,
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural
life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) "armed forces" means the naval, military and air forces and includes any
member of the Armed Forces constituted under any law for the time
being in force, including the paramilitary forces and any auxiliary forces
that are under the control of the Central Government or the State
Government;
(b) "hospital" means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts
of any institution for the reception and treatment of persons during
convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention or rehabilitation;
(c) "police officer" shall have the same meaning as assigned to the
expression "police" under the Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861);
(d) "women's or children's institution" means an institution, whether called an
orphanage or a home for neglected women or children or a widow's
home or an institution called by any other name, which is established and
maintained for the reception and care of women or children.]
1207.[(3) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age shall be
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and
shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical
expenses and rehabilitation of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid
to the victim.
COMMENT.—
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983 (Mathura Act).—Acquittal of policemen in the
infamous Mathura Rape Case1208. and the nationwide protest against the verdict led to
the 1983 Amendments to the Rape Laws in India. Sections 375 and 376, IPC, 1860 had
been substantially changed by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1983 (Act 43 of
1983). The same Act also introduced several new sections, viz., sections 376A, 376B,
376C and 376D, IPC, 1860. Of these, section 376A punished sexual intercourse with
wife without her consent by a judicially separated husband, section 376B punished
sexual intercourse by a public servant with woman in his custody, section 376C
punished sexual intercourse by Superintendent of Jail, Remand Home, etc., with
inmates in such institutions and section 376D punished sexual intercourse by any
member of the management or staff of a hospital with any woman in that hospital.
These new sections were introduced with a view to stop sexual abuses of women in
custody, care and control by various categories of persons which though not
amounting to rape were nevertheless considered highly reprehensible. The amended
section 376 IPC, 1860 prescribed a minimum punishment of seven years'
imprisonment for the offence of rape. For combating the vice of custodial rape, rape on
pregnant woman, rape on girls under 12 years of age and gang rape a minimum
punishment of 10 years' imprisonment had been made obligatory. However, for special
reasons to be recorded in the judgment the Court in either case could impose a
sentence lesser than seven or 10 years, as the case may be.
A further improvement in the law relating to sexual offences could be found in the
provisions of section 228A IPC, 1860, section 327(2) Cr PC, 1973 and section 114A
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which were introduced by the Criminal Law (Amendment)
Act, 1983. New provisions for trial in camera (section 327(2) Cr PC, 1973) and against
disclosure as to identity of the victims of sexual offences as in sections 376, 376A,
376B, 376C and 376D, IPC, 1860 (section 228, IPC, 1860) were not only to protect the
honour of sexually-victimised women but also made it possible for them to depose in
Court without any fear of social ostracism. And section 114A Indian Evidence Act, 1872
by raising a presumption as to absence of consent in cases of custodial rape, rape on
pregnant women and gang rape as in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (g) of sub-section
(2) of section 376, IPC, 1860 merely on the evidence of the ravished women had, at
least partially, removed the infirmity from the evidence of a victim of rape that was
hitherto unjustly attached to her testimony without taking note of the fact that in India,
a disclosure of this nature was likely to ruin the prospect of the girl's rehabilitation in
society for all times to come and unless her story was painfully true she would not
have taken such a grave risk merely to malign the accused.1209. Moreover, in cases of
rape, particularly custodial rape it was almost impossible to get any other independent
evidence to corroborate the testimony of the prosecutrix.
It has been held that the result of the Amendment of 1983 is that the offences listed in
section 376(2) are graver in nature and therefore, it is necessary that the charge under
the sub-section should be distinctly recorded and also reasons for conviction should be
recorded.1210.
[s 376.1]Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 13 of 2013 (w.e.f. 2 March 2013) (post
Nirbhaya):
After a violent incident of a gang rape of a woman in the capital city of Delhi in 2012,
bowing to public outrage, Verma Committee had been set up whose recommendations
gave place to important changes in law relating to rape. Some recommendations, viz.,
not to increase the age of consent to 18 from 16, as it stood before; introduction of
matrimonial rape; non-requirement of sanction for prosecution of armed personnel
were not accepted but the law changed as regards against consent by introducing
section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 barring questions in cross-examination
of the victim about the previous sexual experience or immoral character and also
making the issue of previous sexual experience as irrelevant, and certain other
procedural aspects in Cr PC, 1973 inter alia, relating to investigation by woman police
officers, video recording of statements before magistrates, time limit for completing of
enquiry, requirement of trial proceedings in camera, etc.
[s 376.1.1] No death for rape.—
Respecting the demand from many quarters, the Verma committee reacted as:
In our considered view, taking into account the views expressed on the subject by an
overwhelming majority of scholars, leaders of women's organisations, and other
stakeholders, there is a strong submission that the seeking of death penalty would be a
regressive step in the field of sentencing and reformation. We, having bestowed
considerable thought on the subject, and having provided for enhanced sentences (short of
death) in respect of the above-noted aggravated forms of sexual assault, in the larger
interests of society, and having regard to the current thinking in favour of abolition of the
death penalty, and also to avoid the argument of any sentencing arbitrariness, we are not
inclined to recommend the death penalty.
[s 376.1.2] Chemical Castration.—
Rejecting the proposal of Chemical Castration as a punishment for rape Committee
observed:
We note that it would be unconstitutional and inconsistent with basic human rights treaties
for the state to expose any citizen without their consent to potentially dangerous medical
side-effects. For this reason, we do not recommend mandatory chemical castration of any
type as a punishment for sex offenders.
[s 376.2] Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 (w.e.f. 21 April 2018).
After public outrage against a suspected gang rape and murder of a girl aged eight in
Rasana village near Kathua in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 2018 amended Chapter XVI of the IPC, 1860 to provide for stringent
punishment for perpetrators of rape particularly of girls below 12 and 16 years. Rape
on a woman under 12 years of age is now made punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 20 years, but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and with fine or with death. Gang rape on a woman under 12
years of age is now made punishable with imprisonment for life, and with fine, or with
death. Rape of girls below the age of 16 years is punishable with imprisonment of 20
years or life imprisonment. The imprisonment for life shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's natural life. The minimum punishment for rape of girl above
the age of 16 is 10 years.
Section 376 is not gender neutral and sexual abuse of minor boys does not come
within its purview. The punishment under Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(POCSO) Act, 2012 continues to be 10 years to life imprisonment for offences against
boys below 12 and seven years to life imprisonment for offences against boys above
12 to 18.
The law amends the Cr PC, 1973 mandating the completing of investigation from the
existing provision of three months to two months. The Act also bars anticipatory bail in
cases of rape of minor girls below 16 years of age. Any appeal against sentence of
rape shall be disposed of within six months.
[s 376.3] Medical Examination of accused and victim.—
In cases of rape or attempted rape medical examination of the victim and the accused
soon after the incident often yields a wealth of corroborative evidence. Such an
opportunity should not, therefore, be lost on any account. Though the prosecutrix can
be examined only with her consent, the accused can be subjected to such an
examination by virtue of section 53 of the Cr PC, 1973. It has also to be remembered
that the accused too can demand such an examination under section 54 Cr PC, 1860
especially when he feels that such an examination will disprove the charge brought
against him. Thus, presence of smegma on corona glandis (glans penis) of the accused
soon after the incident is proof against complete penetration since it is rubbed off
during intercourse.1211. But to be of any value examination of smegma must be done
within 24 hours.1212.
Where proof of sexual intercourse with the woman is itself not an issue, such as when
it is an admitted fact and the case rests upon issues of consent and where medical
examination revealed semen stains on the vaginal swabs and salwar of the victim, the
Court said that at best it is an evidence of commission of sexual intercourse but not
necessarily of rape.1213.
[s 376.4] Two finger Test.—
The two finger test and its interpretation violate the right of rape survivors to privacy,
physical and mental integrity and dignity. Thus, this test, even if the report is
affirmative, cannot ipso facto, be given rise to presumption of consent. In view of
International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, 1966; United Nations
Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power,
1985, rape survivors are entitled to legal recourse that does not re-traumatise them or
violate their physical or mental integrity and dignity. They are also entitled to medical
procedures conducted in a manner that respects their right to consent. Medical
procedures should not be carried out in a manner that constitutes cruel, inhuman, or
degrading treatment and health should be of paramount consideration while dealing
with gender-based violence. The State is under an obligation to make such services
available to survivors of sexual violence. Proper measures should be taken to ensure
their safety and there should be no arbitrary or unlawful interference with his
privacy.1214.
[s 376.5] Prosecutrix not an accomplice.—
A prosecutrix complaining of having been a victim of an offence of rape is not an
accomplice after the crime. There is no rule of law that her testimony cannot be acted
upon without corroboration in material particulars, for the reason, that she stands on a
much higher pedestal than an injured witness.1215. A woman, who is the victim of
sexual assault, is not an accomplice to the crime but is a victim of another person's lust
and, therefore, her evidence need not be tested with the same amount of suspicion as
that of an accomplice. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 nowhere says that her evidence
cannot be accepted unless it is corroborated in material particulars. She is undoubtedly
a competent witness under section 118 and her evidence must receive the same
weight as is attached to an injured in cases of physical violence.1216.
[s 376.6] Defence that the girl was of easy virtue.—
Whether the victim of rape was previously accustomed to sexual intercourse or not,
cannot be the determinative question. On the contrary, the question still remains as to
whether the accused committed rape on the victim on the occasion complained of.
Even if the victim had lost her virginity earlier, it can certainly not give a licence to any
person to rape her. It is the accused who was on trial and not the victim. So as to
whether the victim is of a promiscuous character is totally irrelevant in a case of rape.
Even a woman of easy virtue has a right to refuse to submit herself to sexual
intercourse to anyone and everyone, because she is not a vulnerable object or prey for
being sexually assaulted by anyone and everyone. A prosecutrix stands on a higher
pedestal than an injured witness for the reason that an injured witness gets the injury
on the physical form, while the prosecutrix suffers psychologically and
emotionally.1217. In Narender Kumar v State (NCT of Delhi),1218. the Supreme Court
dealt with a case where the allegation was that the victim of rape herself was an
unchaste woman, and a woman of easy virtue. The Court discussed Rajoo v State of
MP,1219. and held that so far as the prosecutrix is concerned, mere statement of
prosecutrix herself is enough to record a conviction, when her evidence is read in its
totality and found to be worthy of reliance. The incident in itself causes a great distress
and humiliation to the victim though, undoubtedly a false allegation of rape can cause
equal distress, humiliation and damage to the accused as well. The Court further held
that some facts exist proving that victim was habituated to sexual intercourse, cannot
be a reason to draw an inference that she was of 'loose moral character'. This cannot
be a reason for her to be raped; she also has a right to protect her dignity and refuse to
submit to sexual intercourse by anyone. Merely because a woman is of easy virtue, her
evidence cannot be discarded on that ground alone rather it is to be cautiously
appreciated.1220.
[s 376.7] Past Sexual conduct of Victim.—Legislative changes.— [s 376.8] Section
155(4) of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 removed.—
Under section 155(4) of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 the credit of a witness may be
impeached when a man is prosecuted for rape or an attempt to ravish, it may be shown
that the prosecutrix was of generally immoral character. This clause was omitted by Act
4 of 2003, section 3 (w.e.f. 11 December 2002) whereby the defence is prohibited from
impeaching prosecutrix's testimony on the basis of her past sexual history.
[s 376.9] Insertion of new section 53A in Indian Evidence Act, 1872.—
By the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2013 a new section (53A) was inserted in the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 in which it is clearly stated that where the question of
consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the victim or of such person's previous
sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent or
the quality of consent. Section 53A of Evidence Act; Evidence of character or previous
sexual experience not relevant in certain cases.—In a prosecution for an offence u/ss.
354, 354A, 354B, 354C, section 354D, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 376D or 376E of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or for attempt to commit any such offence, where the question
of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the victim or of such person's previous
sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent or
the quality of consent.
[s 376.10] Amendment to section 146 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872.—
By the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 the proviso to section 146 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 was substituted by a new proviso which prohibits to adduce
evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the victim as to the general
immoral character, or previous sexual experience, of such victim with any person for
proving such consent or the quality of consent.1221.:—
[s 376.11] Suicide by victim.—
Where in a rape case, the victim committed suicide before the trial and was not
available for examination but the other evidence proved the guilt of the accused, it was
held that non-availability of the victim was no ground for acquittal. The accused was
convicted under sections 375/511 as at least attempt to rape, if not rape, was
established from the evidence.1222.
[s 376.12] Absence of injury.—
It is true that injury is not a sine qua non for deciding whether rape has been
committed. But it has to be decided on the factual matrix of each case. It was observed
in Pratap Misra v State of Orissa,1223. where allegation was of rape by many persons
and several times, but no injury was noticed. Presence of injury in this case, certainly is
an important factor if the prosecutrix's version is credible, and then no corroboration
would be necessary. But if the prosecutrix's version is not credible then there would be
need for corroboration.1224.
[s 376.13] Corroboration of testimony.—
The trend of judicial opinion is that in rape cases corroboration is not a matter of law,
but a guide of prudence, as the testimony of the victim is vital unless there are
compelling reasons for corroboration.1225. The Supreme Court has held that a woman
who has been raped is not an accomplice. If she was ravished she is the victim of an
outrage and if she consented there is no rape. In the case of a girl below the age of
consent, her consent will not matter so far as the offence of rape is concerned, but if
she consented her evidence will be suspect as that of an accomplice. The true rule of
prudence requires that in every case of this type the advisability of corroboration
should be present in the mind of the Judge and that must be indicated in the judgment.
But corroboration can be dispensed with by the Judge if in the particular
circumstances of the case before him he himself is satisfied that it is safe to do
so.1226. Indeed no rule of thumb can be laid down in this matter for every case must
depend a good deal on its own peculiar facts and circumstances. Thus, in Rafiq's
case1227. Krishna Iyer, J, observed:
when no woman of honour will accuse another of rape since she sacrifices thereby what is
dearest to her, he cannot cling to a fossil formula and insist on corroborative evidence, even
if taken as a whole, the case spoken to by the victim strikes a judicial mind as probable …
When a woman is ravished what is inflicted is not merely physical injury but the deep sense
of some deathless shame … Judicial response to human rights cannot be blunted by legal
bigotry.
Similarly, in Bhoginbhai's case1228. Thakkar, J, observed with some anguish:
In the Indian setting refusal to act on the testimony of the victim of sexual assault in the
absence of corroboration as a rule is adding insult to injury … A girl or a woman in the
tradition bound non-permissive society of India would be extremely reluctant even to admit
that any incident which is likely to reflect on her chastity had ever occurred. She would be
conscious of the danger of being ostracised by the society … And when in the face of these
factors the crime is brought to light, there is built-in assurance that the charge is genuine
rather than fabricated … Just as a witness who has sustained an injury (which is not shown
or believed to be self-inflicted) is the best witness in the sense that he is least likely to
exculpate the real offender, the evidence of a victim of sex offence is entitled to great
weight absence of corroboration notwithstanding.
Refusal by the accused person to subject himself to blood test for the purpose of
determining his fatherhood of the child who was born as a result of the alleged rape
was considered to be an evidence of corroboration.1229.
[s 376.14] Conviction on sole testimony of prosecutrix.—
A conviction on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix is sustainable where the Court is
convicted of the truthfulness of the prosecutrix and there exist no circumstances which
cast a shadow of doubt over her veracity.1230. To insist on corroboration, except in the
rarest of rare cases, is to equate one who is a victim of the lust of another, with an
accomplice to a crime and thereby insult womanhood.1231.
[s 376.15] CASES.— Rape by police constable.—
The victim was allegedly raped in a hotel room by a police constable. She could not
identify him. No test identification parade was held. The Supreme Court said that the
identity was established by the fact that the accused was arrested from the hotel. The
room was booked by him. He was not able to explain his whereabouts at the time of
the offence. The Court further observed that the Courts have to adopt a different
approach in such case. The Court should not get swayed by minor contradictions or
discrepancies and defective investigation.1232.
[s 376.16] Rape and conspiracy for rape.—
The four accused persons used their affluence and pretensions for friendship and
thereby lured innocent schoolgirls and then sexually exploited them and subjected
them to rape. Two of them actually committed acts of rape, the third made overtures to
one of the victims and the fourth, being a driver, conveyed them to the farmhouse
where they were exploited. Their acts were proved by witnesses. Two of them were
convicted under section 376. The third and the forth, though committed no act of rape,
were convicted under section 376 read with section 120-B (conspiracy), it being not
necessary that all co-conspirators should act in a similar manner. Their life sentence
was reduced to 10 years of RI.1233.
[s 376.17] CASES.—Charge not proved.—
Where the evidence of prosecutrix contradicts as to time and offence, and when the
medical and FSL reports did not support the prosecution case, Supreme Court held that
the acquittal is proper.1234. Where the age of the victim was doubtful and she stated
that without her consent the accused did something to her which he ought not to have
done but not disclosing what he actually did, it was held that it could not be inferred
that the accused had committed rape on her. It was held that conviction of the accused
under section 376 was rightly set aside.1235.
The prosecutrix was an educated woman and employed. She went in the jeep of the
accused at night for a long distance intending to meet her senior officer. She alleged
that she was raped by the accused in his house when they halted there. This was
wholly unusual conduct. There was no explanation of any compelling reason for
meeting the officer at night. There were no stains of semen or blood on her clothes.
She asserted virginity but medical evidence showed that she was habituated to sex.
The accused was held to be entitled to benefit of doubt.1236.
Two persons were charged and prosecuted under section 376(2)(g) for gang raping a
girl. The victim was desirous of marrying one of them and, therefore, did not report the
matter willingly. There were various infirmities in the prosecution evidence. The
conviction of the accused for the aforesaid offence was set aside.1237.
[s 376.18] Unchaste woman.—
The Supreme Court has laid down that the unchastity of a woman does not make her
"open to any and every person to violate her person as and when he wishes. Merely
because she is a woman of easy virtue, her evidence cannot be thrown overboard. At
the most the officer called upon to evaluate her evidence would be required to
administer caution unto himself before accepting her evidence.1238. Where in a
prosecution for gang rape, the prosecutrix did not make any complaint to anybody for
five days giving false explanation for delay, the doctor found no injury on any part of her
body and she was found to be a lady of immoral character or of lax morals, it was held
that it was unsafe to rely on her evidence.1239. The Supreme Court has held that the
mere fact that the prosecutrix was of loose moral character and was used to sexual
intercourse and might have gone to the accused herself, were not grounds to disbelieve
her statement. Such facts could demolish the case of abduction. But the prosecutrix,
being of 10–11 years of age, was not capable of giving consent for abusing her
sexually. The conviction of the accused was restored.1240.
According to the Supreme Court, it is not a ground for acquittal of the accused that the
prosecutrix was not having a good character and was a girl of easy virtues.1241.
[s 376.19] The proviso removed by Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013.—
The proviso to section 376(2) IPC, 1860 laid down that the Court may, for adequate and
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose sentence of imprisonment of
either description for a term of less than 10 years. This proviso is now removed by
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 in the wake of increasing crimes against women.
It is, therefore, no longer possible to plead for any mitigating circumstances for
reducing the quantum of punishment.
Where a person took away his niece under the promise of providing her a job, and
completely believing his trust, raped her in a beastly manner, the Court said that no
further leniency could be shown to him and, therefore, the sentence of seven years' RI
and a fine of Rs. 2000 was to be maintained.1242.
A defenceless married woman was tricked out of her house taking advantage of the
drunken state of her husband. She was ravished in a most dastardly manner by three
out of six members of the gang. All the three were awarded the maximum penalty of
life-term by the Courts below. Only one came up in appeal before the Supreme Court.
The Court said that no leniency could be shown to any one of them. The single
appellant could not be treated differently from others who were serving their life
sentence.1243.
[s 376.19.1] Incest.—
The accused had lost contact with his daughter when she was very young. They met
again when she was 23 and they were both alcoholics. The incest started when the
daughter was 24 and continued for three years, during which time she gave birth to
their child. It was held that the offence as aggravated by the duration of the
relationship, the fact that a child was born and that the incest continued before, during
and after the pregnancy. The sentencing judge had given due weight to the accused's
depression, alcoholism and contrition, The sentence of 2½ years was considered to be
alright. However, there was no justification for the extended licence period it was not
possible to conclude that the normal licence period would be inadequate to prevent
recommission, having regard to other ways in which contact with the daughter could be
prevented.1244..
[s 376.20] Rape and grievous hurt.—
The victim girl aged seven years was in the care and custody of the accused and the
natural and unnatural sexual acts were committed by him over a period of time. The
injuries which were caused by the accused on the day of the incident were either on the
skull or the hand or the thumb and therefore could not have been the reason for which
death had occurred. In such a situation the liability of the accused for the commission
of the offence under section 302, IPC, 1860 would remain in serious doubt. The
accused should be held liable for the offence under section 325, IPC, 1860. Thus, the
Court while maintaining the conviction and sentences awarded under sections 376 (2)
(f) and 377, IPC, 1860 altered the conviction under section 302, IPC, 1860 to one under
section 325, IPC, 1860. Accordingly, the death penalty was set aside and punishment of
RI for seven years was imposed.1245.
[s 376.21] Jurisdiction.—
The offence was completed at the place of kidnapping. The girl was carried to some
other place where the ultimate purpose of raping her by several persons was
accomplished. The Court said that the offences in question were a series of acts so
connected together as to form part of the same transaction within the meaning of
section 223(d), Cr PC, 1973. All of them could be tried at the place of kidnapping.1246.
The offence is not compoundable. It has been held that a compromise cannot be a
factor in reduction of quantum of punishment.1247.
[s 376.22] Trial-in-camera.—
An application for trial-in-camera without disclosing the name of the applicant was
allowed and her father was not allowed to seek quashing of the complaint in the
interest of family honour.1248.
[s 376.23] Offences comparable to rape and indecent assault.—
The accused appealed against a sentence of nine years' imprisonment imposed
following his guilty plea to causing a nuisance to the public by making threatening,
obscene and malicious telephone calls. He had made about 1000 telephone calls over
a two weeks' period to 15 complainants. The calls had been made for his sexual
gratification and had involved him ordering his victims to perform sexual acts against
themselves, under threat of rape or serious physical injury. He had a record of previous
convictions for using the telephone system to send offensive and indecent matter.
It was held that the sentencing judge was entitled to conclude that the offences
committed by the accused had been comparable to rape and indecent assault. His
previous convictions, together with the pre-sentence report and a psychiatric report,
also demonstrated that he presented a continuing and escalating danger to women.
Accordingly, the sentence imposed was not excessive.1249.
[s 376.24] Probation.—
The refusal to grant probation to the person found guilty of rape has been held to be
proper.1250.?
Assistance to Rape Victims : Supreme Court Guidelines
In Delhi Domestic Working Women's Forum v UOI,1251. the Supreme Court found that in
the cases of rape, the investigating agency as well as the Subordinate Courts
sometimes adopt totally an indifferent attitude towards the prosecutrix and therefore,
the Supreme Court issued following directions in order to render assistance to the
victims of rape:
(1) The complainants of sexual assault cases should be provided with legal representation.
It is important to have someone who is well-acquainted with the criminal justice system.
The role of the victim's advocate would not only be to explain to the victim the nature of the
proceedings, to prepare her for the case and to assist her in the police station and in Court
but to provide her with guidance as to how she might obtain help of a different nature from
other agencies, for example, mind counselling or medical assistance. It is important to
secure continuity of assistance by ensuring that the same person who looked after the
complainant's interests in the police station represents her till the end of the case.
(2) Legal assistance will have to be provided at the police station since the victim of sexual
assault might very well be in a distressed state upon arrival at the police station, the
guidance and support of a lawyer at this stage and whilst she was being questioned would
be of great assistance to her.
(3) The police should be under a duty to inform the victim of her right to representation
before any questions were asked of her and that the police report should state that the
victim was so informed.
(4) A list of advocates willing to act in these cases should be kept at the police station for
victims who did not have a particular lawyer in mind or whose own lawyer was unavailable.
(5) The advocate shall be appointed by the Court, upon application by the police at the
earliest convenient moment, but in order to ensure that victims were questioned without
undue delay, advocates would be authorised to act at the police station before leave of the
Court was sought or obtained.
(6) In all rape trials anonymity of the victim must be maintained, as far as necessary.
(7) It is necessary, having regard to the Directive Principles contained under Article 38(1) of
the Constitution of India to set up Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. Rape victims
frequently incur substantial financial loss. Some, for example, are too traumatised to
continue in employment.
(8) Compensation for victims shall be awarded by the Court on conviction of the offender
and by the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board whether or not a conviction has taken
place. The Board will take into account pain, suffering and shock as well as loss of earnings
due to pregnancy and the expenses of child birth if this occurred as a result of the rape.
In addition thereto, it is an obligation on the part of the State authorities and
particularly, the Director General of Police and Home Ministry of the State to issue
proper guidelines and instructions to the other authorities as how to deal with such
cases and what kind of treatment is to be given to the prosecutrix, as a victim of sexual
assault requires a totally different kind of treatment not only from the society but also
from the State authorities. Certain care has to be taken by the Doctor who medically
examines the victim of rape. The victim of rape should generally be examined by a
female doctor. Simultaneously, she should be provided the help of some psychiatric.
The medical report should be prepared expeditiously and the Doctor should examine
the victim of rape thoroughly and give his/her opinion with all possible angle, e.g.,
opinion regarding the age taking into consideration the number of teeth, secondary sex
characters, and radiological test, etc. The Investigating Officer must ensure that the
victim of rape should be handled carefully by lady police official/officer, depending
upon the availability of such official/officer. The victim should be sent for medical
examination at the earliest and her statement should be recorded by the IO in the
presence of her family members making the victim comfortable except in incest cases.
Investigation should be completed at the earliest to avoid the bail to the accused on
technicalities as provided under section 167 Cr PC, 1973 and final report should be
submitted under section 173 Cr PC, 1973 at the earliest.
[Dilip v State of MP. 1252.]
1172. Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, section 3, for the heading "Of rape" (w.e.f. 25 December 1983).
1204. Subs. by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 (13 of 2013), section 9 (w.e.f. 3
February 2013). Earlier section 376 was substituted by Act 43 of 1983, section 3 (w.e.f. 25
December 1983). Section 376, before substitution by Act 13 of 2013, stood as under: