Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person
whose interest offender is bound to protect.
Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful loss to
a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was
bound, either by law, or by a legal contract, to protect, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
COMMENT—
Under section 418 of IPC, 1860 who ever cheats with the knowledge that is likely
thereby to cause wrongful loss to the person whose interest in the transaction to which
the cheating relates he was bound either by law or by legal contract to protect, shall be
punished with imprisonment or fine or with both.545. This section applies to cases of
cheating by guardians, trustees, solicitors, agents, and the manager of a Hindu family,
directors or managers of a bank in fraud of the shareholders. It is the abuse of trust
that is met with severe punishment.
[s 418.1] False balance-sheet for inducing to renew deposit.—
Where the directors, manager and accountant dishonestly that is to obtain wrongful
gain for themselves or to cause wrongful loss to others put before the shareholders
balance sheets which they knew to be materially false and misleading and likely to
mislead the public as to the condition of the bank and concealed its true condition and
thereby induced depositors to allow their money to remain in deposit with the bank,
they were held liable under this section.546. In Medchl Chemicals & Pharma Pvt Ltd v
Biological E Ltd,547. wherein it was observed that: "In order to attract the provisions of
section 418 and section 420 the guilty intent, at the time of making the promise is a
requirement and an essential ingredient thereto and subsequent failure to fulfil the
promise by itself would not attract the provisions of section 418 or section 420. Mens
rea is one of the essential ingredients of the offence of cheating under section 420. As
a matter of fact Illustration (g) to section 415 makes the position clear enough to
indicate that mere failure to deliver in breach of an agreement would not amount to
cheating but is liable only to a civil action for breach of contract."
545. Behram Bomanji Dubash v State of Karnataka, 2010 Cr LJ 3963 (KAR).
546. Moss, (1893) 16 All 88 . Refusal by bank officers, for reasons beyond their control, to take
a house on rent after promising was not punishable under this section though the landlord
relying on the promise spent money on finishing the house as desired. It was a matter for a civil
action. S Shankarmani v Nibar Ranjan Parida, 1991 Cr LJ 65 (Ori).
547. Medchl Chemicals & Pharma Pvt Ltd v Biological E Ltd, 2000 (3) SCC 269 [LNIND 2000 SC
373] .