Theft.
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly1. any movable property2. out of the possession
of any person3. without that person's consent,4. moves that property5. in order to such
taking, is said to commit theft.
Explanation 1.—A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable
property, is not the subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of
theft as soon as it is severed from the earth.
Explanation 2.—A moving effected by the same act which affects the severance may
be a theft.
Explanation 3.—A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle
which prevented it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by
actually moving it.
Explanation 4.—A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to
move that animal, and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so
caused, is moved by that animal.
Explanation 5.—The consent mentioned in the definition may be express or implied,
and may be given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that
purpose authority either express or implied.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z's ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the
tree out of Z's possession without Z's consent. Here, as soon as A has severed
the tree in order to such taking, he has committed theft.
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z's dog to follow it. Here, if
A's intention be dishonestly to take the dog out of Z's possession without Z's
consent. A has committed theft as soon as Z's dog has begun to follow A.
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bullock in a certain
direction, in order that he may dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the
bullock begins to move, A has committed theft of the treasure.
(d) A, being Z's servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z's plate, dishonestly
runs away with the plate, without Z's consent. A has committed theft.
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of the warehouse, till Z
shall return. A carries the plate to a goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was
not in Z's possession. It could not therefore be taken out of Z's possession, and
A has not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal breach of
trust.
(f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here the
ring is in Z's possession, and if A dishonestly removes it, A commits theft.
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A by
taking it, commits no theft, though he may commit criminal misappropriation of
property.
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z's house. Not venturing to
misappropriate the ring immediately for fear of search and detection, A hides
the ring in a place where it is highly improbable that it will ever be found by Z,
with the intention of taking the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the
loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the ring, commits theft.
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop. A,
not owing to the jeweller any debt for which the jeweller might lawfully detain the
watch as a security, enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z's
hand, and carries it away. Here A, though he may have committed criminal
trespass and assault, has not committed theft, inasmuch as what he did was not
done dishonestly.
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch lawfully
as a security for the debt, and A takes the watch out of Z's possession, with the
intention of depriving Z of the property as a security for his debt, he commits
theft, inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly.
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z's possession without
Z's consent, not having paid what he borrowed on the watch, he commits theft,
though the watch is his own property inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly.
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z's possession, without Z's consent, with
the intention of keeping it until he obtains money from Z as a reward for its
restoration. Here A takes dishonestly; A has therefore committed theft.
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in Z's absence, and takes
away a book without Z's express consent for the purpose merely of reading it,
and with the intention of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have
conceived that he had Z's implied consent to use Z's book. If this was A's
impression, A has not committed theft.
(n) A asks charity from Z's wife. She gives A money, food and clothes, which A
knows to belong to Z her husband. Here it is probable that A may conceive that
Z's wife is authorised to give away alms. If this was A's impression, A has not
committed theft.
(o) A is the paramour of Z's wife. She gives A valuable property, which A knows to
belong to her husband Z, and to be such property as she has no authority from Z
to give. If A takes the property dishonestly, he commits theft.
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A's own property, takes
that property out of B's possession. Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he
does not commit theft.
COMMENT—
Section 378 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC, 1860) defines 'theft' as the dishonest
removal of movable property 'out of the possession of any person' without the consent
of that person. 'Theft', has the following ingredients, namely, (i) dishonest intention to
take property; (ii) the property must be movable; (ii) it should be taken out of the
possession of another person; (iv) it should be taken without the consent of that
person; and (v) there must be some moving of the property in order to accomplish the
taking of it.
To bring home an offence under section 378 IPC, 1860, the prosecution is to prove (a)
that there was a movable property; (b) that the said movable property was in the
possession of person other than the accused; (c) that the accused took it out or moved
it out of the possession of the said person; (d) that the accused did it dishonestly, i.e.,
with intention to cause wrongful gain to himself or wrongful loss to another; (e) that the
accused took the movable property or moved it without the consent of the possessor
of the movable property.1
The Criminal Court is not required to adjudicate on rival claims of title claimed by the
parties. All that the Criminal Court has to decide is whether at the time of the alleged
incident the property which is the subject-matter of theft was in the 'possession' of the
complainant and whether it was taken out of the possession of the complainant with a
dishonest intention.2
1. Prafula Saikia v State of Assam, 2012 Cr LJ 3889 (Gau).
2. P T Rajan Babu v Anitha Chandra Babu, 2011 Cr LJ 4541 (Ker).
3. Nobin Chunder Holder, (1866) 6 WR (Cr) 79.
4. Ramratan, AIR 1965 SC 926 [LNIND 1964 SC 365] : (1965) 2 Cr LJ 18 .
5. Rameshwar Singh, (1936) 12 Luck 92 .