Making a false document.
4. [A person is said to make a false document or electronic record—
First.—Who dishonestly or fraudulently—
(a) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a document;
(b) makes or, transmits any electronic record or part of any electronic record;
(c) affixes any 5.[electronic signature] on any electronic record;
(d) makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or the authenticity of the
6.[electronic signature],
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of
document, electronic record or 7.[electronic signature] was made, signed,
sealed executed, transmitted or affixed by or by the authority of a person by
whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made, signed, sealed,
executed or affixed; or
Secondly.—Who, without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation
or otherwise, alters a document an electronic record in any material part thereof, after
it has been made, executed or affixed with 8.[electronic signature] either by himself or
by any other person, whether such person be living or dead at the time of such
alteration; or
Thirdly.—Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or
alter a document or an electronic record or to affix his 9.[electronic signature] or any
electronic record knowing that such person by reason of unsoundness of mind or
intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception practised upon him, he does not
know the contents of the document or electronic record or the nature of the
alteration.]
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000 written by Z. A, in order to
defraud B, adds a cipher to the 10,000, and makes the sum 1,00,000, intending
that it may be believed by B that Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.
(b) A, without Z's authority, affixes Z's seal to a document purporting to be a
conveyance of an estate from Z to A, with the intention of selling the estate to B
and thereby of obtaining from B the purchase-money. A has committed forgery.
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any
sum having been inserted in the cheque. A fraudulently fills up the cheque by
inserting the sum of ten thousand rupees. A commits forgery.
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without inserting
the sum payable and authorizes B to fill up the cheque by inserting a sum not
exceeding ten thousand rupees for the purpose of making certain payment. B
fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees.
B commits forgery.
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B's authority,
intending to discount it as a genuine bill with a banker and intending to take up
the bill on its maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker
by leading him to suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount
the bill, A is guilty of forgery.
(f) Z's will contains these words—"I direct that all my remaining property be equally
divided between A, B and C". A dishonestly scratches out B's name, intending
that it may be believed that the whole was left to himself and C. A has
committed forgery.
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his
order by writing on the bill the words "Pay to Z or his order" and signing the
endorsement. B dishonestly erases the words "Pay to Z or his order" and thereby
converts the special endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery.
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his
estate, executes a conveyance of the same estate to B, dated six months earlier
than the date of the conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had
conveyed the estate to B before he conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery.
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee from the
legatee named by Z, and by representing to Z that he has prepared the will
according to his instructions, induces Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery.
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B's name without B's authority, certifying that A
is a man of good character and in distressed circumstances from unforeseen
misfortune, intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other
persons. Here, as A made a false document in order to induce Z to part with
property. A has committed forgery.
(k) A without B's authority writes a letter and signs it in B's name certifying to A's
character, intending thereby to obtain employment under Z. A has committed
forgery in as much as he intended to deceive Z by the forged certificate, and
thereby to induce Z to enter into an express or implied contract for service.
Explanation 1.—A man's signature of his own name may amount to forgery.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed
that the bill was drawn by another person of the same name. A has committed
forgery.
(b) A writes the word "accepted" on a piece of paper and signs it with Z's name, in
order that B may afterwards write on the paper a bill of exchange drawn by B
upon Z, and negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of
forgery; and if B, knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A's
intention, B is also guilty of forgery.
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the
same name. A endorses the bill in his own name, intending to cause it to be
believed that it was endorsed by the person whose order it was payable; here A
has committed forgery.
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the
seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z, executes a lease of the estate of Z at a
nominal rent and for a long period, and dates the lease six months prior to the
seizure, with intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease
was granted before the seizure. B, though he executes the lease in his own
name, commits forgery by antedating it.
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A's benefit, and
with intent to defraud his creditors; and in order to give a colour to the
transaction, writes a promissory note binding himself to pay to B a sum for value
received, and antedates the note, intending that it may be believed to have been
made before. A was on the point of insolvency. A has committed forgery under
the first head of the definition.
Explanation 2.—The making of a false document in the name of a fictitious person,
intending it to be believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the
name of a deceased person, intending it to be believed that the document was made
by the person in his lifetime, may amount to forgery.
10.[Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression "affixing 11.
[electronic signature]" shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) of
subsection (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000].
ILLUSTRATION
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictitious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in
the name of such fictitious person with intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery.
COMMENTS.—
An analysis of section 464 of IPC, 1860 shows that it divides false documents into
three categories:
A. The first is where a person dishonestly or fraudulently makes or executes a
document with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document was made
or executed by some other person, or by the authority of some other person, by whom
or by whose authority he knows it was not made or executed.
B. The second is where a person dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or
otherwise, alters a document in any material part, without lawful authority, after it has
been made or executed by either himself or any other person.
C. The third is where a person dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign,
execute or alter a document knowing that such person could not by reason of (a)
unsoundness of mind, or (b) intoxication, or (c) deception practised upon him, know the
contents of the document or the nature of the alteration. In short, a person is said to
have made a 'false document', if (i) he made or executed a document claiming to be
someone else or authorised by someone else, or (ii) he altered or tampered a
document, or (iii) he obtained a document by practicing deception, or from a person not
in control of his senses.12. Making of any false document, in view of the definition of
'forgery' is the sine qua non therefor. What would amount to making of a false
document is specified in section 464 thereof. What is, therefore, necessary is to
execute a document with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document
inter alia was made by the authority of a person by whom or by whose authority he
knows that it was not made.13. In the case of Mir Nagvi Askari v CBI, the Court held that:
A person is said to make a false document or record if he satisfies one of the three
conditions as noticed hereinbefore and provided for under the said section. The first
condition being that the document has been falsified with the intention of causing it to be
believed that such document has been made by a person, by whom the person falsifying the
document knows that it was not made. Clearly the documents in question in the present
case, even if it be assumed to have been made dishonestly or fraudulently, had not been
made with the intention of causing it to be believed that they were made by or under the
authority of some one else. The second criteria of the section deals with a case where a
person without lawful authority alters a document after it has been made. There has been
no allegation of alteration of the voucher in question after they have been made. Therefore
in our opinion the second criteria of the said section is also not applicable to the present
case. The third and final condition of Section 464 deals with a document, signed by a
person who due to his mental capacity does not know the contents of the documents which
were made i.e because of intoxication or unsoundness of mind etc. Such is also not the
case before us. Indisputably therefore the accused before us could not have been convicted
with the making of a false document.14.
To attract the second clause of section 464 there has to be alteration of document
dishonestly and fraudulently. So in order to attract the clause 'secondly' if the document
is to be altered it has to be for some gain or with such objective on the part of the
accused. Merely changing a document does not make it a false document.15.
[s 464.1] Making of false document.—
False document is said to have been made when a person dishonestly or fraudulently
makes a document with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document
was made by some other person.16.
[s 464.2] Issuance of a caste certificate.—
The Sub-Divisional Officer (SDO) issued a caste certificate. The application for the
same was supported by affidavit of the father of the applicant. Later, the High Power
Scrutiny Committee cancelled the certificate. A complaint was filed alleging forgery,
cheating, conspiracy, etc. The High Court held that no offence of forgery was
constituted as neither signature nor seals, etc., of Sub-Divisional Officer were forged
but the caste certificate was issued by the SDO, himself and therefore it was not a false
document in the eyes of law according to the provisions of section 464 of IPC, 1860.17.
4. Subs. by The Information Technology Act (Act 21 of 2000), section 91 and First Schedule,
w.e.f. 17 October 2000. The words "electronic record" have been defined in section 29A.
5. Subs. for the words "digital signature" by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2008 (10 of 2009), section 51 (w.e.f. 27 October 2009).
6. Subs. for the words "digital signature" by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2008 (10 of 2009), section 51 (w.e.f. 27 October 2009).
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid.
10. Ins. by The Information Technology Act (Act 21 of 2000), section 91 and First Sch, w.e.f. 17
October 2000.
11. Subs. for the words "digital signature" by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
2008 (10 of 2009), section 51 (w.e.f. 27 October 2009).
12. Mohammed Ibrahim v State of Bihar, (2009) 8 SCC 751 [LNIND 2009 SC 1774] : 2010 Cr LJ
2223 : AIR 2010 SC (Supp) 347; Malay Chatterjil v State of Bihar, 2012 Cr LJ 2240 (Pat).
13. Devendra v State of UP, 2009 (7) SCC 495 : 2009 (7) Scale 613 [LNIND 2009 SC 1158] .
14. Mir Nagvi Askari v CBI, AIR 2010 SC 528 [LNIND 2009 SC 1651] : (2009) 15 SCC 643 [LNIND
2009 SC 1651] .
15. Parminder Kaurl v State of UP, (2010) 1 SCC 322 [LNIND 2009 SC 1924] : AIR 2010 SC 840
[LNIND 2009 SC 1924] .
16. Raj Shekhar Agrawal v State of WB, 2016 Cr LJ 993 (Cal) : (2015) 4 CALLT 615 (HC).
17. Harvir Singh v State of MP, 2016 Cr LJ 3608 (MP) : 2016 (2) JLJ 422 .