Putting, person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion.
Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or attempts
to put any person in fear, of any injury, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT—
By this section a distinction between the inchoate and the consummated offence is
recognised. The attempt to commit extortion may proceed so far as to put a person in
fear of injury, or there may be an attempt to excite such fear; but there may not be any
delivery of property, etc. This section punishes the putting of a person in fear of injury
in order to commit extortion.
The injury contemplated must be one which the accused can inflict, or cause to be
inflicted. A threat that God will punish a man for some act is not such an injury. No
injury can be caused or threatened to be caused unless the act done is either an
offence or such as may properly be made the basis of a civil action.131.
[s 385.1] CASES.—
A cloth-seller was threatened with the imposition of a fine if he continued to sell foreign
cloth. He continued to sell such cloth, and, to enforce payment of the fine, his shop was
picketed for two hours and he lost a certain amount of business and ultimately paid the
fine. It was held that the person responsible for the picketing was guilty of an offence
under this section as well as under section 384.132. Where a mukhtar in a criminal case
threatened with intent to extort money to put questions to prosecution witnesses which
were irrelevant, scandalous and indecent, and which were intended to annoy and insult,
it was held that he was guilty under this section.133. No sanction is necessary for
prosecuting a police officer under this section for his act abetting the accused to extort
money from a person by putting him under fear of arrest. Such an act is not a part of
his official functions.134.
131. Tanumal Udhasing, (1944) Kar 146 .
132. Chaturbhuj, (1922) 45 All 137 .
133. Fazlur Rahman, (1929) 9 Pat 725.
134. Chand Ahuja v Gautam K. Hoda, 1987 Cr LJ 1328 (P&H).