House-breaking.
A person is said to commit "house-breaking" who commits house-trespass if he
effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter
described; or if, being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an
offence, or, having committed an offence therein, he quits the house or any part of it
in any of such six ways, that is to say—
First.—If he enters or quits through a passage by himself, or by any abettor of the
house-trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass.
Secondly.—If he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person,
other than himself or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance; or through any
passage to which he has obtained access by scaling or climbing over any wall or
building.
Thirdly.—If he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the
house-trespass has opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any
means by which that passage was not intended by the occupier of the house to be
opened.
Fourthly.—If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the
house-trespass, or in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass.
Fifthly.—If he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing
an assault or by threatening any person with assault.
Sixthly.—If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened
against such entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an
abettor of the house-trespass.
Explanation.—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which
and such house there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the house
within the meaning of this section.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z's house, and
putting his hand through the aperture. This is house-breaking.
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port-hole between decks.
This is house-breaking.
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through a window. This is
house- breaking.
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, having
opened a door which was fastened. This is house-breaking.
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, having lifted
a latch by putting a wire through a hole in door. This is house-breaking.
(f) A finds the key of Z's housedoor, which Z had lost, and commits house-trespass
by entering Z's house, having opened the door with that key. This is house-
breaking.
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z down, and
commits house-trespass by entering the house. This is house-breaking.
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y's doorway. A commits house-trespass by
entering the house, having deterred Z from opposing him by threatening to beat
him. This is house-breaking.
COMMENT—
Invasion of a person's residence should naturally be meted out with deterrent
punishment. This section describes six ways in which the offence of house-breaking
may be committed. Clauses 1–3 deal with entry which is effected by means of a
passage which is not ordinary. Clauses 4–6 deal with entry which is effected by force.
Where a hole was made by burglars in the wall of a house but their way was blocked by
the presence of beams on the other side of the wall, it was held that the offence
committed was one of attempt to commit house-breaking and not actual house-
breaking, and illustration (a) to this section did not apply.685.
685. Ghulam, (1923) 4 Lah 399. See Bhagwan Das v State of UP, 1990 Cr LJ 916 (All), there
being no evidence that the accused was armed with any weapons whatsoever or anybody had
received injury, the offence was converted from one under section 395 to section 448.