Using a false property mark.
Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, package or other
receptacle containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to
be believed that the property or goods so marked, or any property or goods contained
in any such receptacle so marked, belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is
said to use a false property mark.
COMMENT.—
False property mark.—This section defines the offence of using a false property mark.
A property mark is intended to denote ownership over all movable property belonging
to a person whether it is all of one kind or of different kinds. So long as the person
owns movable property, his property mark impressed upon them remains his, though
any particular article out of it may after such impression pass out of his hands and
cease to be his.109.
The function of a property mark to denote certain ownership is not destroyed because
any particular property on which it was impressed has ceased to be of that ownership.
[s 481.1] Ingredients.—
This section requires two essentials:—
1. Marking any movable property or goods, or any case, package or receptacle
containing goods; or using any case, package or receptacle, with any mark
thereon.
2. Such marking or using must be in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to
be believed that the property or goods so marked, or the property or goods,
contained in such receptacle, belonged to the person to whom they did not
belong.
The Supreme Court in Sumant Prasad's case said that the concept of a trade mark
under section 2(1)(g) of Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958, is distinct from that
of a property mark under section 479 of IPC, 1860. It means the concept of trade mark
has not nullified the concept of property mark. Thus, where the accused finding that his
'Puspa Raj' scent could not capture the market copied the property mark from the
carton of complainant's best-selling scent 'Basant Bahar' in toto and marketed his
inferior product under the same name, it was held that he had committed the offence
of both using a false property mark as well as of selling goods marked with a
counterfeit property mark. The fact that the complainant loosely mentioned in his
complaint 'trade mark' did not make any difference, for despite this the complainant's
allegations clearly made out that the accused tried to palm off his inferior scent as if it
was manufactured by and belonged to the complainant. He was, therefore, rightly
convicted under sections 482 and 486, IPC.110.
108. Amendment.—The word "trade" has been omitted by the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958 (Act XLIII of 1958), section 135 and Sch. The Act came into force on 25 November
1959.
109. Dahyabhai, (1904) 6 Bom LR 513 .
110. Sumant Prasad v Sheojanan, 1972 Cr LJ 1707 (SC).