Disturbing religious assembly.
Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly lawfully engaged in the
performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with
fine, or with both.
COMMENT.—
Assemblies held for religious worship, or for the performance of religious ceremonies,
are hereby protected from intentional disturbance.
The object of this section is to secure freedom from molestation when people meet for
the performance of acts in a quiet spot vested for the time in the assembly exclusively,
and not when they engage in worship in an unquiet place, open to all the public as a
thoroughfare.34.
[s 296.1] Ingredients.—
To constitute an offence under this section—
(1) There must be a voluntary disturbance caused.
(2) The disturbance must be caused to an assembly engaged in religious worship
or religious ceremonies.
(3) The assembly must be lawfully engaged in such worship or ceremonies, i.e., it
must be doing what it has a right to do.
[s 296.2] CASES.—Disturbance caused by saying 'amin'.—
A mosque is a place where all sects of Mohammedans are entitled to go and perform
their devotion as of right, according to their conscience; and a Mohammedan of one
sect pronouncing the word "amin" loudly, in the honest exercise of conscience,
commits no offence or civil wrong,35. though he may by such conduct cause
annoyance in the mosque to other worshippers of another sect who do not pronounce
that word loudly.36. But any person, Mohammedan or not, who goes into a mosque not
bona fide for a religious purpose, but mala fide, for the purpose of disturbing others
engaged in their devotions, will render himself criminally liable.37.
[s 296.3] Religious procession.—
Persons of every sect are entitled to take out religious processions with music through
public streets provided that they do not interfere with the ordinary use of the streets by
the public or contravene any traffic regulation or lawful directions issued by the
Magistrate. A religious procession does not change its character merely because the
music is temporarily stopped in front of a mosque.38.
1. The Works of Lord Macaulay, Notes on the chapter of offences relating to religion and caste.
Note j.
34. Vijiaraghava Chariar, (1903) 26 Mad 554, 574 (FB).
35. Ata-Ullah v Azim-Ullah, (1889) 12 All 494 (FB).
36. Jangu v Ahmadullah, (1889) 13 All 419 (FB).
37. Ibid.
38. Mohamud khan, (1948) Nag 657.