Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty
to prevent.
Whoever, being a public servant, intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that
he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such
public servant to prevent;
125.[voluntarily conceals by any act or omission or by the use of encryption or any
other information hiding tool, the existence of a design] to commit such offence, or
makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design;
If offence be committed.
shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of
the longest term of such imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that
offence, or with both;
If offence be punishable with death, etc.
or, if the offence be punishable with death or 126.[imprisonment for life], with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years;
If offence be not committed.
or if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth
part of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for
the offence, or with both.
ILLUSTRATION
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to commit
robbery which may come to his knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit
robbery, omits to give such information, with intent to so facilitate the commission of
that offence. Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the existence of B's design,
and is liable to punishment according to the provisions of this section.
COMMENT—
Public servant concealing design to commit offence.—Section 118 deals with persons
who are not public servants. In this section the same principle is extended to public
servants but with severe penalty.
125. Subs. by the Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 (10 of 2009), section 51
(w.e.f. 27 October 2009).
126. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, section 117 and Sch., for "transportation for life" (w.e.f. 1 January
1956).