Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause
injury.
Whoever, being a public servant, and being, as 7.[such public servant, charged with the
preparation or translation of any document or electronic record, frames, prepares or
translates that document or electronic record] in a manner which he knows or
believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely that he
may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT—
The preceding section deals generally with the disobedience of any direction of law;
this section deals with a specific instance, viz., that of framing an incorrect document
with intent to cause injury. It is similar to section 218, which deals also with cases of
framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from punishment or
property from forfeiture, whereas section 167 deals with cases of framing incorrect
document only with intent to cause injury. In a case, the allegation that the accused,
who is a Deputy Superintendent of Police, suppressed the statement recorded under
section 161 of the CrPC, 1973 in a criminal case registered by the police and produced
a fabricated statement along with the charge sheet before the Magistrate. The Court
held that section 167 is attracted only when a public servant prepares a document in a
manner which he thinks or believes to be incorrect. Essentially, the petitioner's
allegation is that the accused suppressed the real statement prepared under section
161 of the Criminal Procedure Code and produced along with the charge sheet a
fabricated statement. That comes only within the purview of section 193. Therefore,
section 167 is not attracted to the allegations raised by the petitioner in his
complaint.8.
7. Subs. by the Information Technology Act (Act 21 of 2000), section 91 and First Schedule for
the words "such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any document,
frames or translates that document", w.e.f. 17-10-2000. The words "electronic record" have been
defined in section 29A.
8. Joseph v State of Kerala, 2013 Cr LJ 749 : 2012 (4) KHC 157 .