Words referring to acts include illegal omissions.
In every part of this Code, except where a contrary intention appears from the context,
words which refer to acts 1 done extend also to illegal omissions. 2
COMMENT—
This section puts an illegal omission on the same footing as a positive act.
1. 'Acts'.—An 'act' generally means something voluntarily done by a person. 'Act' is a
determination of the will, producing an effect in the sensible world. This word includes
writing and speaking, or, in short, any external manifestation. In the Code it is not
confined to its ordinary meaning of positive conduct of doing something, but includes
also illegal omissions.
2. 'Omissions'.—Liability for an omission requires a legal duty to act; a moral duty to act
is not sufficient. A duty arises from the former when an offence is defined in terms of
omission. This is the situation where the legislature has made it an offence. A legal
duty to act may also be created by a provision of either criminal or civil separate from
the offence charged. Since there is no moral difference between (i) a positive act and
(ii) an omission when a duty is established, it is to be borne in mind that cases of
omissions, the liability should be exceptional and needs to be adequately justified in
each instance. Secondly, when it is imposed this should be done by clear statutory
language. Verbs primarily denoting (and forbidding) active conduct should not be
construed to include omissions except when the statute contains a genuine implication
to this effect.165.
An 'act' generally means something voluntarily done by a person, but in IPC, 1860 the
term 'act' is not confined to its ordinary meaning of positive conduct of doing
something but includes also illegal omission. The effect of sections 32 and 33, IPC,
1860 taken together is that the term 'act' comprises one or more 'acts' or one or more
illegal omissions. The Code (IPC, 1860) makes punishable omissions which have
caused, which have been intended to cause or which have been known to be likely to
cause certain evil effect in the same manner as it punishes acts provided they were
illegal and when the law imposes on a person a duty to act, his illegal omission to act
renders (him) in liable to punishment.166.
[s 32.1] Penalty for omission.—
Maximum penalties applied to active wrongdoing should not automatically be
transferred to corresponding omissions; penalties for omissions should be re-thought
in each case. Indeed, the Indian Penal Code, 1860 does include explicitly the liability
due to omissions. And even Indian courts have affirmed so.167.
165. Dr PB Desai v State of Maharashtra, 2013 (11) Scale 429 [LNIND 2013 SC 815] .
166. Raj Karan Singh v State of UP 2000 Cr LJ 555 (All).
167. Dr PB Desai v State of Maharashtra, 2013 (11) Scale 429 [LNIND 2013 SC 815] .