Mischief.
Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or
damage to the public or to any person,1 causes the destruction of any property, or any
such change in any property or in the situation thereof2 as destroys or diminishes its
value or utility, or affects it injuriously,3 commits "mischief".
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should
intend to cause loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is
sufficient if he intends to cause, or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or
damage to any person by injuring any property, whether it belongs to that person or
not.
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging to
the person who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause
wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(b) A introduces water into an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to
melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of
thereby causing wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy
a debt due from him to Z, destroys those effects, with the intention of thereby
preventing Z from obtaining satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing
damage to Z. A has committed mischief.
(e) A, having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the
intention of causing damage to the under-writers. A has committed mischief.
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who
has lent money on bottomry on the ship. A has committed mischief.
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, intending thereby to
cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief.
(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and
knowing that he is likely to cause damage to Z's crop. A has committed
mischief.
COMMENT—
A bare perusal of this provision clearly reveals that either intention or knowledge, is
required for the offence of mischief. Explanation-1 clearly states that it is not essential
for the offence of mischief that the offender should intend to cause loss or damage to
the owner of the property injured or destroyed. In fact it is sufficient if he intends to
cause, or knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss of damage to any person by
injuring any property, whether it belongs to that person or not. Thus, for the offence of
mischief it is sufficient that the offender knows that by his act he is likely to cause
wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any person.605. This section clearly speaks
of causing any change in property or to destroy or diminishes its value or utility, or
affects it injuriously, commits "mischief. Thus, on this broad definition, certainly by
making construction on public land, which is not permissible, its utility will be
diminished and the property will be injuriously affected".606.
605. Satish Chand Singhal v State of Rajasthan, 2007 Cr LJ 4132 (Raj).
606. Dilip Kumar v State of U P, 2011 Cr LJ 2832 (All).