"Punishments.".
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code are—
First.—Death;
1. [Secondly.—Imprisonment for life;]
2. [***]
Fourthly.—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:—
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
Fifthly.—Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly.—Fine.
COMMENT—
The object of punishment in the scheme of modern social defence is correction of the
wrongdoer and not wrecking gratuitous punitive vengeance on the criminal. Some
attempts have been made to modernise our penal system through piecemeal
legislation at best for the first offenders, the children and the juvenile delinquents
example the Probation of Offenders Act 1958, the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act 2000, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015 etc. In the Indian Penal Code, there is no scope for individualising the punishment;
rather these five forms of punishment have to be doled out to the offenders irrespective
of their psycho-social problems and needs of individual offenders. Commenting on this
unhappy aspect of our penal system Krishna iyer, J, observed in Shivaji's case'.3.
Two men in their twenties thus stand convicted of murder and have to suffer imprisonment
for life because the punitive strategy of our Penal Code does not sufficiently reflect the
modern trends in correctional treatment and personalised sentencing. When accused
persons are of tender age then even in a murder case it is not desirable to send them
beyond the high prison walls and forget all about their correction and eventual reformation.
In Inder Singh's case4. the Supreme Court issued directions to the State Government to
see that the young accused of the case are not given any degrading work and they are
given the benefit of liberal parole every year if their behaviour shows responsibility and
trustworthiness. Moreover, the Sessions Judge was directed to make jail visits to
ensure compliance with these directions.
[s 53.1] Object of Punishment.—
One of the prime objectives of criminal law is imposition of appropriate, adequate, just
and proportionate sentence commensurate with the nature and gravity of crime and
the manner in which the crime is done.5. Undue sympathy by means of imposing
inadequate sentence would do more harm to the justice system and undermine the
public confidence in the efficacy of law.6. The object should be to protect the society
and to deter the criminal in achieving the avowed object to law by imposing appropriate
sentence. It is expected that the Courts would operate the sentencing system so as to
impose such sentence which reflects the conscience of the society and the sentencing
process has to be stern where it should be.7. The main purpose of the sentence broadly
stated is that the accused must realise that he has committed an act which is not only
harmful to the society of which he forms an integral part but is also harmful to his own
future, both as an individual and as a member of the society. Punishment is designed
to protect society by deterring potential offenders as also by preventing the guilty party
from repeating the offence; it is also designed to reform the offender and re-claim him
as a law-abiding citizen for the good of the society as a whole. Reformatory, deterrent
and punitive aspects of punishment thus play their due part in judicial thinking while
determining this question. In modern civilized societies, however, reformatory aspect is
being given somewhat greater importance. Too lenient as well as too harsh sentences
both lose their efficaciousness. One does not deter and the other may frustrate thereby
making the offender a hardened criminal.8.
[s 53.2] Different Approaches.—
Punishment in criminal cases is both punitive and reformative. The purpose is that the
person found guilty of committing the offence is made to realise his fault and is
deterred from repeating such acts in future. On the commission of crime, three types of
reactions may generate; the traditional reaction of universal nature which is termed as
punitive approach. It regards the criminal as a notoriously dangerous person who must
be inflicted severe punishment to protect the society from his criminal assaults. The
other approach is the therapeutic approach. It regards the criminal as a sick person
requiring treatment, while the third is the preventive approach, which seeks to eliminate
those conditions from the society, which were responsible for crime causation. Under
the punitive approach, the rationalisation of punishment is based on retributive and
utilitarian theories. Deterrent theory, which is also part of the punitive approach,
proceeds on the basis that the punishment should act as a deterrent not only to the
offender, but also to others in the community. The therapeutic approach aims at curing
the criminal tendencies, which were the product of a diseased psychology. Therapeutic
approach has since been treated as an effective method of punishment, which not only
satisfies the requirements of law that a criminal should be punished and the
punishment prescribed must be meted out to him, but also reforms the criminal
through various processes, the most fundamental of which is that in spite of having
committed a crime, may be a heinous crime, he should be treated as a human being
entitled to all the basic human rights, human dignity and human sympathy. It was under
this theory that this Court in a stream of decisions, projected the need for prison
reforms, the need to acknowledge the vital fact that the prisoner, after being lodged in
jail, does not lose his fundamental rights or basic human rights and that he must be
treated with compassion and sympathy.9. Imposing a hard punishment on the accused
serves a limited purpose, but at the same time, it is to be kept in mind that relevance of
deterrent punishment in matters of serious crimes affecting society should not be
undermined. Within the parameters of the law an attempt has to be made to afford an
opportunity to the individual to reform himself and lead life of a normal, useful member
of society and make his contribution in that regard.10. In Dhannajoy Chatterjee v State of
WB,11. the Supreme Court has observed that shockingly large number of criminals go
unpunished, thereby increasingly encouraging the criminals and ultimately making
justice suffer by weakening the system's credibility. Realising that it is not the brutality
of punishment but its surety that serves as a greater deterrent, our Supreme Court held
that a barbaric crime does not have to be visited with a barbaric penalty such as public
hanging which will be clearly violative of Article 21 of the Constitution.12. With regards
the question of punishment, it should be noted that punishment in one matter cannot
be the guiding factor for punishment in another. Punishment has a co-relation with
facts and in each case where punishment is imposed, the same must be the resultant
effect of the acts complained of. More serious the violation, more severe is the
punishment and that has been the accepted norm, in matters though, however, within
the prescribed limits.13.
[s 53.3] Reformation Theory.—
The reformative aspect is meant to enable the person concerned to relent and repent
for his action and make himself acceptable to the society as a useful social being.14.
Theory of reformation through punishment is grounded on the sublime philosophy that
every man is born good but circumstances transform him into a criminal. The aphorism
that "if every saint has a past every sinner has a future" is a tested philosophy
concerning human life. VR Krishna Iyer, J, has taken pains to ornately fresco the
reformative profile of the principles of sentencing in Mohammad Giasuddin v State of
AP.15. Reformation should hence be the dominant objective of a punishment and
during incarceration, every effort should be made to recreate the good man out of
convicted prisoner. An assurance to him that his hard labour would eventually snowball
into a handsome saving for his own rehabilitation would help him to get stripped of the
moroseness and desperation in his mind while toiling with the rigours of hard labour
during the period of his jail life. Thus, reformation and rehabilitation of a prisoner are of
great public policy. Hence, they serve a public purpose.16. Punishment is also to reform
such wrongdoers not to commit such offence in future.17.
[s 53.4] Deterrence.—
Deterrence is one of the vital considerations of punishment. Law demands that the
offender should be adequately punished for the crime, so that it can deter the offender
and other persons from committing similar offences. Nature and circumstances of the
offence; the need for the sentence imposed to reflect the seriousness of the offence; to
afford adequate deterrence to the conduct and to protect the public from such crimes
are certain factors to be considered while imposing the sentence.18. Any liberal attitude
by imposing meagre sentences or taking too sympathetic view merely on account of
lapse of time or personal inconveniences in respect of such offences will be result-wise
counterproductive in the long run and against societal interest which needs to be cared
for and strengthened by string of deterrence built in the sentencing system.19. For
instance, a murder committed due to deep-seated mutual and personal rivalry may not
call for penalty of death. However, an organised crime or mass murders of innocent
people would call for imposition of death sentence as deterrence.20. Protection of
society and deterring the criminal is the avowed object of law and is required to be
achieved by imposing an appropriate sentence. The sentencing Courts are expected to
consider all relevant facts and circumstances bearing on the question of sentence and
proceed to impose a sentence commensurate with the gravity of the offence. Courts
must hear the loud cry for justice by the society in cases of heinous crimes like rape on
innocent helpless girls of tender years, as in this case, and respond by imposition of
proper sentence. Public abhorrence of the crime needs reflection through imposition of
appropriate sentence by the Court. To show mercy in the case of such a heinous crime
would be a travesty of justice.21. To give a lesser punishment to the appellants would
be to render the justice system of this country suspect. The common man will lose
faith in the Courts. In such cases, he understands and appreciates the language of
deterrence more than the reformative jargon.22. Punishment to an accused in criminal
jurisprudence is not merely to punish the wrongdoer but also to strike warning to those
who are in the same sphere of crime or to those intending to join in such crime.23.
[s 53.5] Principles of sentencing.—
Sentencing is an important task in the matters of crime. There is no straitjacket
formula for sentencing an accused on proof of crime. In practice, there is much
variance in the matter of sentencing. In many countries, there are laws prescribing
sentencing guidelines, but there is no statutory sentencing policy in India.24. The Indian
Penal Code provides discretion to Indian Judges while awarding the sentence.25.
Courts have wide discretion in awarding sentence within the statutory limits.26. The
Courts have evolved certain principles: twin objective of the sentencing policy is
deterrence and correction.27. There are many philosophies behind sentencing justifying
penal consequences. The philosophical/jurisprudential justification can be retribution,
incapacitation, specific deterrence, general deterrence, rehabilitation, or restoration.
Anyone or a combination thereof can be the goal of sentencing. However, when it
comes to sentencing a person for committing a heinous crime, the deterrence theory
as a rationale for punishing the offender becomes more relevant. In such cases, the
role of mercy, forgiveness and compassion becomes secondary and while determining
the quantum of sentence, discretion lies with the Court. While exercising such a
discretion, the Court has to govern itself by reason and fair play, and discretion is not to
be exercised according to whim and caprice. It is the duty of the Court to impose
adequate sentence, for one of the purposes of imposition of requisite sentence is
protection of the society and a legitimate response to the collective conscience. While
considering as to what would be the appropriate quantum of imprisonment, the Court
is empowered to take into consideration mitigating circumstances, as well as
aggravating circumstances.28. What sentence would meet the ends of justice depends
on the facts and circumstances of each case and the Court must keep in mind the
gravity of the crime, motive for the crime, nature of the offence and all other attendant
circumstances.29. The criminal law adheres in general to the principle of proportionality
in prescribing liability according to the culpability of each kind of criminal conduct. It
ordinarily allows some significant discretion to the Judge in arriving at a sentence in
each case, presumably to permit sentences that reflect more subtle considerations of
culpability that are raised by the special facts of each case. Judges in essence affirm
that punishment ought always to fit the crime; yet in practice, sentences are
determined largely by other considerations. Sometimes it is the correctional needs of
the perpetrator that are offered to justify a sentence, sometimes the desirability of
keeping him out of circulation, and sometimes even the tragic results of his crime.
Inevitably, these considerations cause a departure from just desert as the basis of
punishment and create cases of apparent injustice that are serious and widespread.30.
Proportion between crime and punishment is a goal respected in principle, and in spite
of errant notions, it remains a strong influence in the determination of sentences. The
practice of punishing all serious crimes with equal severity is now unknown in civilized
societies, but such a radical departure from the principle of proportionality has
disappeared from the law only in recent times. Even now for a single grave infraction,
drastic sentences are imposed. Anything less than a penalty of greatest severity for
any serious crime is thought then to be a measure of toleration that is unwarranted and
unwise. But in fact, quite apart from those considerations that make punishment
unjustifiable when it is out of proportion to the crime, uniformly disproportionate
punishment has some very undesirable practical consequences.31. The principle of
proportionality in sentencing a crime doer is well entrenched in criminal jurisprudence.
As a matter of law, proportion between crime and punishment bears most relevant
influence in determination of sentencing the crime doer. The Court has to take into
consideration all aspects including social interest and consciousness of the society for
award of appropriate sentence.32. Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence
would do more harm to the justice system to undermine the public confidence in the
efficacy of law and society could not long endure under such serious threats.
Imposition of sentence without considering its effect on the social order in many cases
may be in reality a futile exercise. The social impact of the crime e.g. where it relates to
offences against women, dacoity, kidnapping, misappropriation of public money,
treason and other offences involving moral turpitude or moral delinquency which have
great impact on social order and public interest, cannot be lost sight of and per se
require exemplary treatment. Any liberal attitude by imposing meagre sentences or
taking too sympathetic view merely on account of lapse of time in respect of such
offences will be result wise counterproductive in the long run and against societal
interest which needs to be cared for and strengthened by a string of deterrence inbuilt
in the sentencing system.33. Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do
more harm to the justice system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of
law and society could not long endure under such serious threats. It is, therefore, the
duty of every Court to award proper sentence keeping in mind the nature of the offence
and the manner in which it was executed or committed etc. Thus, it is evident that
Criminal Law requires strict adherence to the rule of proportionality in providing
punishment according to the culpability of each kind of criminal conduct keeping in
mind the effect of not awarding just punishment on the society.34. An undeserved
indulgence or liberal attitude in not awarding adequate sentence in such cases would
amount to allowing or even to encouraging 'potential criminals'. The society can no
longer endure under such serious threats. Courts must hear the loud cry for justice by
society in cases of heinous crime of rape and impose adequate sentence. Public
abhorrence of the crime needs reflection through imposition of appropriate sentence
by the Court.35.
[s 53.6] Factors to be considered.—
These are some factors which are required to be taken into consideration before
awarding appropriate sentence to the accused. These factors are only illustrative in
character and not exhaustive. Each case has to be seen from its special perspective.
The relevant factors are as under:
(a) Motive or previous enmity;
(b) Whether the incident had taken place on the spur of the moment;
(c) The intention/knowledge of the accused while inflicting the blow or injury;
(d) Whether the death ensued instantaneously or the victim died after several days;
(e) The gravity, dimension and nature of injury;
(f) The age and general health condition of the accused;
(g) Whether the injury was caused without pre-meditation in a sudden fight;
(h) The nature and size of weapon used for inflicting the injury and the force with which
the blow was inflicted;
(i) The criminal background and adverse history of the accused;
(j) Whether the injury inflicted was not sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death but the death was because of shock;
(k) Number of other criminal cases pending against the accused;
(l) Incident occurred within the family members or close relations;
(m) The conduct and behaviour of the accused after the incident. Whether the accused
had taken the injured/the deceased to the hospital immediately to ensure that he/she
gets proper medical treatment?
These are some of the factors which can be taken into consideration while granting an
appropriate sentence to the accused.
The list of circumstances enumerated above is only illustrative and not exhaustive. In
our considered view, proper and appropriate sentence to the accused is the bounded
obligation and duty of the Court. The endeavour of the Court must be to ensure that the
accused receives appropriate sentence, in other words, sentence should be according
to the gravity of the offence. These are some of the relevant factors which are required
to be kept in view while convicting and sentencing the accused.36. The facts and given
circumstances in each case, the nature of the crime, the manner in which it was
planned and committed, the motive for commission of the crime, the conduct of the
accused, the nature of weapons used and all other attending circumstances are
relevant facts which would enter into the area of consideration.37.
[s 53.7] Judicial Discretion:38. Cases.—
A Judge has wide discretion in awarding the sentence within the statutory limits. Since
in many offences, only the maximum punishment is prescribed and for some offences
the minimum punishment is prescribed, each Judge exercises his discretion
accordingly.39. In case where for an offence, maximum imprisonment is prescribed and
there is no provision for minimum imprisonment, the Court can exercise wide
discretion imposing any imprisonment which may be from one day (or even till the
rising of the court) to ten years/life.40. However, the Courts will have to take into
account certain principles while exercising their discretion in sentencing, such as
proportionality, deterrence and rehabilitation. In a proportionality analysis, it is
necessary to assess the seriousness of an offence in order to determine the
commensurate punishment for the offender.41. Though punishment is the discretion of
the Court, yet it must be exercised judicially and where circumstances call for a
deterrent punishment, it ought to be awarded in an appropriate case.42. Thus where the
accused, a young man of 22 committed multiple murders for sheer gain in a most
cruel, callous and fiendish fashion, there was no way to show him any mercy as it was
rarest of the rare cases where a sentence of death was fully justified.43. In exercising
this discretion, the Court must consider the gravity of the offence, the mitigating or the
extenuating circumstances of the case which may justify the award of the lesser or
maximum sentence.44. Where the accused was a youth of 19, the Supreme Court while
upholding conviction under section 304-Part I, Indian Penal Code, 1860, (IPC, 1860)
reduced his sentence to the period already undergone which was 18 and a half months
in the instant case. The accused, a Government servant, who will lose pensionary
benefits due to conviction, deserves to be treated leniently.
The Supreme Court has laid down that in cases of death in custody on account of third
degree methods, deterrent punishment should be awarded.45. Where certain police
officials, who took a man illegally in their custody and gave him beating due to which he
died, were convicted under section 342, it was held that the facts that one of the
accused was recipient of a medal from the President for saving a life, was awarded Rs.
5,000 by the State Government also and was suffering from T.B. and the other accused
had acted on the direction of his superior, were not mitigating circumstances and the
accused were liable to be punished with the maximum sentence.46.
Where due to dire poverty the accused killed his ailing wife, as he could not provide
money for her operation and thereafter killed his two children, as they would be
neglected after their mother's death, it was held the accused deserved to be awarded
life imprisonment and not capital punishment.47. Where the murder in question showed
signs of ruthless, unrelenting and determined vindictiveness and though the accused
was 55 at the time of occurrence and 70 at the time of this appeal, the Supreme Court
did not think it necessary to modify his sentence of life imprisonment.48. Similarly,
where murders were committed for gain, the Supreme Court refused to interfere with
death sentence only because the condemned prisoners were very young and their
wives and children and aged parents were dependent on them. Such considerations,
the Court said, are present in most cases.49. Where, for the offence of dacoity under
section 395, the trial Court awarded three years' R.I., the High Court acquitted the
offenders, but the Supreme Court restored the conviction after a long gap during which
they got married and had resumed normal life, the period already undergone was
considered to be sufficient, but a fine of Rs. 3,000 was imposed on each of them.50.
Where a conviction under section 16I, IPC, 1860 read with section 5(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 was confirmed, the Gujarat High Court modified the
sentence of R.I. for one year and ordered that the appellant shall undergo sentence of
R.I. for six months only. This was done in view of his age of 60 years and a number of
illnesses he was suffering from.51. The accused had been out of job for nearly 16 years
and had undergone the trial for a number of years. He was 65 years old but had
received no pension and had a large family to maintain. Hence, the Supreme Court
while confirming the conviction, reduced the sentence of one year R.I. each under
section 161 and the Prevention of Corruption Act to 15 days R.I. on each count. The
sentence of fine was however confirmed.52. Where the accused had accepted a very
small amount of Rs. 30 as bribe about 16 years back and underwent the agony of trial
for a long time and had to support his family, he had been in jail for some time during
trial, considering these facts his sentence of imprisonment was reduced from three
months R.I. to the period already undergone.53.
Imposition of proper and appropriate sentence is bounded obligation and duty of the
Court. The endeavour of the Court must be to ensure that the accused received
appropriate sentence. The sentence must be accorded to the gravity of the offence.54.
[s 53.8] Minimum Sentence.—
In order to exercise the discretion of reducing the sentence the statutory requirement is
that the Court has to record "adequate and special reasons" in the judgment and not
fanciful reasons, which would permit the Court to impose a sentence less than the
prescribed minimum. The reason has not only to be adequate but also special. What is
adequate and special would depend upon several factors and no straitjacket formula
can be indicated.55. Mere absence of provisions for minimum sentence is no reason or
justification to treat the offence under the Act (NDPS) as any less serious.56.
For the offence of murder, minimum sentence is 'life imprisonment'. Thus, the High
Court cannot modify the sentence of life imprisonment awarded by the Trial Court to
the one already undergone.57.
To the five kinds of punishments in the section, two more were added by subsequent
enactments, viz., whipping (now abolished) and detention in reformatories.
1. Death.—Death punishment is awarded for murder in rarest of the rare cases.58. It
may be awarded as punishment for the following offences:—
(1) Waging war against the Government of India (section 121).
(2) Abetting mutiny actually committed (section 132).
(3) Giving or fabricating false evidence upon which an innocent person suffers death
(section 194).
(4) Threatening or inducing any person to give false evidence- if innocent person is
convicted and sentenced in consequence of such false evidence, with death (195A-Part
II)
(5) Murder (section 302).
(6) Abetment of suicide of a minor, or an insane or an intoxicated person (section 305).
(7) Attempt to murder by life convicts (section 307-PartII)
(8) Kidnapping for ransom, etc. (section 364A)
(9) Causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of rape victim (section
376A)
(10) Repeat offenders of offences punishable under section 376 or section 376A or
section 376D (section 376E)
(11) Dacoity accompanied with murder (section 396).
(12) Attempt to murder by a person under sentence of imprisonment for life, if hurt is
caused (section 307). [For the detailed discussion on Death Penalty See Comments
under section 302 IPC].
In addition to this, Death penalty can be imposed by virtue of section 34, 149,109 and
120B of IPC.
2. Imprisonment for life is now substituted for transportation. "Imprisonment for life" in
the Code means "rigorous imprisonment for life" and not "simple imprisonment for
life".59.
3. Imprisonment.—Imprisonment is of two kinds: (a) rigorous and (b) simple. In the
case of rigorous imprisonment, the offender is put to hard labour such as grinding corn,
digging earth, drawing water, cutting firewood, bowing wool, etc. In the case of simple
imprisonment, the offender is confined to jail and is not put to any kind of work.
Imposition of hard labour on prisoners undergoing rigorous imprisonment has been
held to be legal.60.
The minimum term of imprisonment, however, is fixed in the following two cases: (1) If,
at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or
causes grievous hurt to any person, he is punished with imprisonment of not less than
seven years (section 397).
(2) If, at the time of attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed
with any deadly weapon, he is punished with imprisonment of not less than seven years
(section 398).
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2013 [Act No. 13 of 2013 w.e.f 2 April 2013]
provides minimum punishment for the following offences:
(1) Public servant disobeying direction under law- Imprisonment for a term, which
shall not be less than six months. (section 166A)
(2) Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.- Imprisonment for not less
than ten years. (section 326A)
(3) Outraging the modesty of a woman- Imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than one year (section 354)
(4) Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe- Imprisonment
of not less than three years. (section 354B)
(5) Voyeurism- Imprisonment of not less than one year. (section 354C)
(6) Trafficking of person- Seven years [section 370(2)], ten years [sections 370(3),
(4)], 14 years [section 370(5)],
(7) Exploitation of a trafficked child- Imprisonment of not less than five years but
which may extend to seven years and with fine. (section 370A)
(8) Rape- Seven years [section 376(1)], ten years [section 376(2)].
(9) Causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim- Imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than 20 years (section 376A)
(10) Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation- Imprisonment
of either description for a term which shall not be less than two years (section
376B)
(11) Sexual intercourse by a person in authority- Imprisonment of either description
for a term which shall not be less than five years. (section 376C)
(12) Gang rape- Imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less than 20 years.
(section 376D).
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 has further amended the Indian Penal Code
1860. The Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018 has increased the minimum sentence
in section 376(1) from seven years to ten years. The 2018 Amendment Act has inserted
sections 376AB, 376DA and 376DB which provide for enhanced punishment in certain
aggravated forms of rape. Refer Chapter XVI infra.
An offender is punished with rigorous imprisonment without the alternative of simple
imprisonment, in the cases of—
(1) Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of an offence,
which is capital by this Code (section 194).
(2) Rape (sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB and 376E)
(3) House-trespass in order to the commission of an offence punishable with death
(section 449).
The following offences are punishable with simple imprisonment only:—
(1) Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade; or unlawfully buying or bidding for
property (sections 168, 169).
(2) A person absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceedings from a
public servant or preventing service of summons or other proceedings, or preventing
publication thereof; or not attending in obedience to an order from a public servant
(sections 172, 173, 174).
(3) Intentional omission to produce a document to a public servant by a person legally
bound to produce such document; or intentional omission to give notice or information
to a public servant by a person legally bound to give; or intentional omission to assist a
public servant when bound by law to give assistance (sections 175, 176, 187).
(4) Refusing oath when duly required to take oath by a public servant; or refusing to
answer a public servant authorised to question or refusing to sign any statement made
by a person himself before a public servant (sections 178, 179, 180).
(5) Disobedience to an order duly promulgated by a public servant if such disobedience
causes obstruction, annoyance, or injury (section 188).
(6) Escape from confinement negligently suffered by a public servant; or negligent
omission to apprehend, or negligent sufferance of escape, on the part of a public
servant in cases not otherwise provided for (sections 223, 225-A).
(7) Intentional insult or interruption to a public servant sitting in any stage of a judicial
proceeding (section 228).
(8) Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue (section 291).
(9) Wrongful restraint (section 341).
(10) Defamation: printing or selling defamatory matter known to be so (sections 500,
501, 502).
(11) Uttering any word, or making any sound or gesture, with an intention to insult the
modesty of a woman (section 509).
(12) Misconduct in a public place by a drunken person (section 510).61.
[s 53.9] Imprisonment for the remainder of the Accused's natural life.—
As per the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013,62. the punishment for rape (section
376) is rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but
which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the
remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. In sections 370,
376(A), 376(D), 376(E) it is also specifically mentioned that 'Life' shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life. The Criminal Law
(Amendment) Act, 2018 has increased the minimum sentence in section 376(1) from
seven years to ten years as well as inserted sections 376AB, 376DA and 376DB which
provide for enhanced punishment in certain aggravated forms of rape. Refer Chapter
XVI infra.
Spending 13 and half years in jail does not mean that the petitioner has undergone a
sentence for life.63.
4. Forfeiture.—The punishment of absolute forfeiture of all property of the offender is
now abolished. Sections 61 and 62 of the IPC, 1860 dealing with such forfeiture are
repealed by Act XVI of 1921.
There are, however, three offences in which the offender is liable to forfeiture of
specific property. They are sections 126, 127 and 169 of the Code.64.
5. Fine.—Fine is the only punishment in the following cases:—
(1) A person in charge of a merchant vessel, negligently allowing a deserter from the
Army or Navy or Air Force to obtain concealment in such vessel, is liable to a fine not
exceeding Rs. 500 (section 137).
(2) The owner or occupier of land on which a riot is committed or an unlawful assembly
is held, and any person having or claiming any interest in such land, and not using all
lawful means to prevent such riot or unlawful assembly, is punishable with a fine not
exceeding Rs. 1,000 (section 154).
(3) The person for whose benefit a riot has been committed not having duly
endeavoured to prevent it (section 155).
(4) The agent or manager of such person under like circumstances (section 156).
(5) False statements in connection with an election (section 171-G).
(6) Illegal payments in connection with an election (section 171-H).
(7) Failure to keep election accounts (section 171-I).
(8) Voluntarily vitiating the atmosphere so as to render it noxious to the public health, is
punishable with a fine up to Rs. 500 (section 278).
(9) Obstructing a public way or line of navigation, is punishable with a fine not
exceeding Rs. 200 (section 283).
(10) Committing of a public nuisance not otherwise punishable is punishable with a
fine not exceeding Rs. 200 (section 290).
(11) Publication of a proposal regarding a lottery, is punishable with a fine not
exceeding Rs. 1,000 (section 294-A).
Where the accused partners of a firm were acquitted on a charge under section 420 of
making substantial gains for themselves and an appeal against their acquittal was
decided against them 15 years after the acquittal, fine and not imprisonment was
considered proper punishment.65. Where the murder accused remained in prison for
sometime and was on bail for 13 years, he was not committed to prison; a fine of Rs.
50,000 in addition to the imprisonment already undergone was imposed, he being a
young man.66. Where the accused along with others convicted under section 323 for
six months' imprisonment had already undergone an imprisonment of one year and,
looking at his good conduct inside jail and lest he should lose his service, he was given
the benefit of section 3 of the Probation of Offenders Act 1958 so to assure that his
conviction should not affect his service.67.
[s 53.10] Rigorous and Simple imprisonment.—
Section 53 of the IPC, 1860 defines five kinds of punishment which includes
punishment for life and two other kinds of imprisonment, i.e., rigorous and simple
imprisonment. Rigorous imprisonment is one which is required by law to be completed
with hard labour. There are principally two categories of prisoners: (1) under trial
prisoners and (2) convicted prisoners (Besides them there are those detained as
preventive measure, and those undergoing detention for default of payment of fine). A
person sentenced to simple imprisonment cannot be required to work unless he
volunteers himself to do the work. However, the Jail officer who requires a prisoner
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment to do hard labour would be doing so as enjoined
by law and mandated by the Court.68. Thus, while a person sentenced to simple
imprisonment has the option of choosing to work, a person sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment is required by law to undergo hard labour. The under trials are not
required to work in Jail.69. Section 60 of the Indian Penal Code confers power on a
sentencing Court to direct that "such imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous or that
such imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part of such imprisonment shall
be rigorous and the rest simple." The sentence of "imprisonment for life" tagged along
with a number of offences delineated in the IPC, 1860 is interpreted as "rigorous
imprisonment for life" and not simple imprisonment.70.
Supreme Court Guidelines regarding employment of prisoners and wages.—
(1) It is lawful to employ the prisoners sentenced to rigorous imprisonment to do hard
labour whether he consents to do it or not.
(2) It is open to the jail officials to permit other prisoners also to do any work which
they choose to do provided such prisoners make a request for that purpose.
(3) It is imperative that the prisoner should be paid equitable wages for the work done
by them. In order to determine the quantum of equitable wages payable to prisoners
the State concerned shall constitute a wage fixation body for making
recommendations. We direct each State to do so as early as possible.
(4) Until the State Government takes any decision on such recommendations every
prisoner must be paid wages for the work done by him at such rates or revised rates as
the Government concerned fixes in the light of the observations made above. For this
purpose we direct all the State Governments to fix the rate of such interim wages within
six weeks from today and report to this Court of compliance of this direction.
(5) We recommend to the State concerned to make law for setting apart a portion of
the wages earned by the prisoners to be paid as compensation to deserving victims of
the offence the commission of which entailed the sentence of imprisonment to the
prisoner, either directly or through a common fund to be created for this purpose or in
any other feasible mode.
[State of Gujarat v Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat.71.]
[s 53.11] Rights of Convicts.—
Convicts are not, by mere reason of the conviction, denuded of all the fundamental
rights which they otherwise possess. A compulsion under the authority of law,
following upon a conviction, to live in a prison house entails by its own force the
deprivation of fundamental freedoms like the right to move freely throughout the
territory of India or the right to "practise" a profession. A man of profession would thus
stand stripped of his right to hold consultations while serving out his sentence. But the
Constitution guarantees other freedoms like the right to acquire, hold and dispose of
property for the exercise of which incarceration can be no impediment, likewise, even a
convict is entitled to the precious right guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution that
he shall not be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure
established by law.72.
[s 53.12] Cases of Leniency.—
In a given situation, where it is demonstrated that during the pendency of the
proceedings the accused has undergone a lot of suffering such as where the accused
was in custody or for that matter, in situations where the accused is suspended and is
on a subsistence allowance or where as a result of the prosecution the consequences
have been so disastrous that the accused has suffered virtual ruination, these aspects
alone would be valid justification on which a plea for leniency could be based. On the
other hand, one needs to bear in mind that the consequences of criminal acts catch up
with the accused particularly when the crimes are against the society the ethical
concept of forgive and forget merely because the incident took place in the distant past
will not hold good in a Court of Law.73. Where there was acquittal in the same year in
which the crime was committed but the acquittal was reversed after eight years and
conviction and jail terms were awarded and appeal against this order was disposed of
in the 20th year of the crime, the Supreme Court reduced the sentence to the period
already undergone and imposed a fine which if not paid, the original sentence was to
be restored.74. Where the guilt of the accused under sections 406 and 120-B were
established beyond all reasonable doubt, the Supreme Court did not interfere with their
conviction. However, in view of the fact that the accused had undergone proceedings
for a period of two decades, their sentence was reduced to one already undergone.75.
Where the accused was convicted for criminal conspiracy and breach of trust and
about 48 years had elapsed since the accused was charged for the offences, keeping in
view his advanced age he was sentenced to imprisonment till rising of the Court with a
fine of Rs. 5,000.76. Where a man of 20 was convicted under section 324 and
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for four months whereas he had already
undergone imprisonment of one year and two months, his sentence was reduced to
one already undergone.77. Where the accused were convicted under section 326 for
causing grievous hurt to the victim, considering the lapse of about six years from the
incident, accused not being habitual criminals or previous convicts and there being no
misuse of liberty during bail, the sentence was reduced to the period already undergone
with a fine of Rs. 5,000 each.78. Where the accused convicted and sentenced under
sections 379 and 411, were found to be the sole earning member of their families and
they had no past criminal records, the Court directed that one year's rigorous
imprisonment instead of two would meet the ends of justice.79. Where the accused
seeing his wife in a compromising position with a man assaulted both of them as a
result of grave and sudden provocation resulting in the death of both, his conviction
under section 304, Part II was upheld but the sentence of five years' R.I. was reduced to
one years' R.I. with the recommendation that the State Government might remit such a
portion of sentence as it deemed fit and proper.80.
[s 53.13] Offences against women.—
Where the accused had outraged the modesty of a woman, his conviction under
section 354 was upheld but considering the lapse of eight years, it was not found
desirable to send him back to jail to be in midst of hardened criminals. He was
sentenced to sit in the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class for five days
continuously, during the entire working hours.81. Where the accused, in his late fifties,
betraying the confidence of the prosecutrix committed rape on her, it was held that he
deserved no sympathy. However, as the accused remained in jail for eight years, the
Court took a liberal view and considering his age and helplessness sentenced him to
the period for which he had already been in jail.82. Where the victim of rape belonged to
a tribal (Bhilla) community and the act of the accused did not cast any serious stigma
on the girl and she was married to a different person sometime after the incident by her
father, it was held that sentence much below the minimum sentence prescribed could
be inflicted on the accused.83. Where the conviction and sentence of the accused
husband to rigorous imprisonment for six months under section 498-A was substituted
with a fine of Rs. 6,000, taking into consideration the age, occupation and family
conditions of the husband, it was held that though the appellate Court was justified in
substituting the jail sentence, the Court ought not have awarded a modest fine. The fine
was raised to Rs. 30,000.84. Where a person was married in childhood and was
subjected to a second marriage under the pressure exerted by his parents as well as
the woman who became his second wife, it was held that a lesser sentence of six
months instead two years' R.I. and a fine of Rs. 2,000 to the accused husband and
imprisonment till the rising of the Court and a fine of Rs. 1,500 to the accused parents
and the second wife in place of the original sentence of six months' R.I. and a fine of
Rs. 1,000 would meet the ends of justice.85.
[s 53.14] Conversion of death sentence into life imprisonment.—
Where the accused, being dissatisfied with the partition of family property, committed
ghastly murders of four members of his family and there was no evidence that the
crime was pre-planned and the circumstances indicated that he was under the
influence of some kind of extreme mental or emotional disturbance which impaired his
capacity to appreciate criminality of his conduct, death sentence awarded to him was
converted into imprisonment for life.86. Where three accused persons conspired to kill
the wife and two minor children of one of the accused but one of the accused was not
a party to actual commission of murder and the part played by the other accused was
not definitely proved, the sentence of death imposed on both the accused was
commuted to that of life imprisonment. The death sentence of the main accused, the
father, was not interfered with.87. Where the accused shot his two younger brothers
dead on a petty quarrel, as there was no pre-plan to commit murder, the death sentence
awarded to the accused was altered into life imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 30,000.88.
[s 53.15] Award of compensation.—
Power of Courts to award compensation is not ancillary to other sentences but it is in
addition thereto. This power was intended to do something to reassure the victim that
he or she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system. It is a measure of responding
appropriately to crime as well of reconciling the victim with the offender. It is, to some
extent, a constructive approach to crimes. It is indeed a step forward in our criminal
justice system.89. The purpose of imposition of fine and/or grant of compensation to a
great extent must be considered having the relevant factors therefore in mind. It may
be compensating the person in one way or the other.90.
In the BMW Case, the Supreme Court directed the accused to pay an amount of Rs. 50
lakh to the Union of India which will be utilized within for providing compensation to the
victims of motor accidents, where the vehicles owner, driver etc. could not be traced,
like victims of hit and run cases.91. Where a doctor was convicted for an attempt to
cause miscarriage and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and
pay a fine of Rs. 5,000, the sentence of imprisonment was found to be excessive and
was set aside but the fine was enhanced to Rs. 15,000 out of which, if realised Rs.
10,000 was to be paid to the mother of the deceased for the maintenance of the
children of the deceased shown to be living with her.92. The accused, an agriculturist,
assaulted his sister's husband with a knife giving a blow in his abdomen resulting in
death. The accused was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life under
section 302. However, on overall appraisal of material on record and the accused
having no criminal antecedents, his conviction under section 302 was set aside and he
was convicted under section 304 and directed to undergo 10 years' R.I. But on special
facts of the case an option was given to the accused to pay a fine of Rs. 40,000 in all
and in default to undergo R.I. for seven years and, if the fine was paid within 12 weeks,
jail sentence was to be reduced to three years' R.I. Out of the fine, if paid, Rs. 10,000
were to be given to the mother of the deceased and Rs. 30,000 utilised for the benefit
of the three minor children of the deceased in sum of Rs. 10,000 each.93. Where the
accused caused a serious injury in the abdomen of a man and was convicted under
section 307 but considering that he had a widowed mother and two children and was
willing to compensate the victim substantially, sentence imposed upon him was
modified into one of fine in the way of compensation of Rs. One lakh.94. Where in a
case under section 304, Part II the accused remained in custody for over a year after
conviction by the High Court and also for sometime during investigation, the Apex
Court reduced the sentence to the period already undergone but imposed a fine of Rs.
20,000 payable to the widow of the deceased as compensation.95.
[s 53.16] Reform and rehabilitation.—
Where the accused caused several incised injuries to a man, he was convicted under
section 326 but as there was no previous enmity between the accused and the injured
person and it was the first offence committed by him, besides 14 years had lapsed
since the commission of the offence, he was given an opportunity to reform and
rehabilitate in society and his sentence was reduced to the period already
undergone.96. Where the accused convicted under section 302 was only 15 years old at
the time of offence and at the time of appeal he was over 30, he could not be sent to
approved school or jail. His conviction was upheld but the sentence was quashed.97.
[s 53.17] Separate trial for child offender.—
One of the members of an unlawful assembly was of 13 years at the time of the
incident. His trial was conducted along with other members who were not children.
This was held to be illegal. The plea of child offender was not raised before the trial
court or the High Court. The Supreme Court, therefore, confirmed the conviction but set
aside the sentence imposed on him.98.
[s 53.18] Cases of no leniency.—
In a multiple murder case, it was argued that the accused had donated to the social
organisations and that he was not a hardened criminal and not a menace to the society
and at any rate by wiping him out the crime cannot be wiped out. The Supreme Court
observed that the accused was involved in "organised criminal activity" and he had
acquired social status through crime. The accused had no regard for the value of
human life. It was held that there were no mitigating circumstances. The main cause of
his conviction was illicit arrack business and brothel. The fact that for this reason he
became the victim of police cruelty was also considered to be not a mitigating
circumstance.99. In a double murder case, the accused was awarded death sentence
but the execution was postponed. It was held that pain, agony and horror suffered by
the prisoner after he was informed about execution was no ground for substituting
death sentence.100. Where the accused constructed a water tank which collapsed due
to use of low quality material resulting in the death of several persons and the accused
was sentenced to the maximum of two years of R.I. provided under section 304A, it
was held that the sentence could not be reduced merely because the matter was more
than seven years old and that it would also be a grave injustice to the victims of the
crime.101. Where the accused formed an unlawful assembly with the common object of
killing three members of a family and one of the accused killed all the three on the spot
one after the other in few minutes while others caught hold of the victims, the sentence
of life imprisonment awarded to them under sections 302/149 was confirmed but the
High Court observed that it was a fit case to award the maximum penalty of death
sentence as the accused had acted like a butcher in a slaughter house.102. Where the
accused were convicted under section 328 r/w. section 34 for robbing a simple
innocent lady of 50 years by administering a stupefying drug through sugarcane juice,
the Court refused to take a lenient view and reduce the sentence.103. Where the
accused committed a high-handed and broad daylight robbery on a public road, the
Court declined to take a lenient view.104. Voluntary intoxication by itself neither
absolves the offender of the consequences of his act nor does it makes him liable for
lesser offence.105. The mere fact that the accused inflicted a single injury resulting in
death is not sufficient in itself to convert the offence from one under sections 300–304,
Part II.106. When the victim has sustained a grievous injury on a vital portion of the
body and the injury is life-threatening imposition of sentence of six days only which
was the period already undergone by the accused in confinement is too lenient.
However, as the parties have forgotten their differences and are living peacefully since
25 years, the Court taking into consideration the aggravating as well as mitigating
factors under the facts of this case, imposed a sentence of six months' R.I. and a fine
of Rs. 25,000/- against the accused.107.
[s 53.19] No leniency—Offences against women.—
Where the accused committed rape on a woman and killed her and it was found that he
had behaved like an animal, it was held that it was not a fit case for showing
leniency.108. Where in a case of bride burning, the mother-in-law of the victim was
sentenced to life imprisonment, the Supreme Court refused to show any leniency on
the ground that the accused mother-in-law had remained in jail for more than a decade.
The Court observed that it would be a travesty of justice if sympathy was shown when
a cruel act like bride burning is committed. It is rather strange that the mother-in-law
who herself is a woman should resort to killing another woman. Undue sympathy
would be harmful to the cause of justice.109. Where the accused himself killed his wife
by burning and made his two children motherless, no lenient view could be taken on the
ground that he had two children.110.
[s 53.20] Enhancement of sentence.—
Where in a group clash due to old enmity, the accused killed ten persons of a
community indiscriminately within a span of two hours and accused took the leading
part, sentence of life imprisonment imposed upon him was enhanced to death penalty
in the facts and circumstances of the case but life imprisonment awarded to the co-
accused under sections 302/149 was confirmed.111.
[s 53.21] Guidelines for sentencing policy.—
Currently, India does not have a structured sentencing guidelines that have been issued
either by the legislature or the judiciary. However, the Courts have framed certain
guidelines in the matter of imposition of sentence. The Courts will have to take into
account certain principles while exercising their wide discretion in sentencing, such as
proportionality, deterrence and rehabilitation. In a proportionality analysis, it is
necessary to assess the seriousness of an offence in order to determine the
commensurate punishment for the offender.112. Justice demands that Courts should
impose punishment befitting the crime so that the Courts reflect public abhorrence of
the crime.113. Law regulates social interests, arbitrates conflicting claims and demand.
Undoubtedly, there is a cross-cultural conflict where living law must find answer to the
new challenges and the Courts are required to mould the sentencing system to meet
the challenges.114.
The principle governing the imposition of punishment will depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. However, the sentence should be appropriate, adequate,
just, proportionate and commensurate with the nature and gravity of the crime and the
manner in which the crime is committed. The gravity of the crime, motive for the crime,
nature of the crime and all other attending circumstances have to be borne in mind
while imposing the sentence.115. An offence, which affects the morale of the society,
should be severely dealt with. Socio-economic status, religion, race, caste or creed of
the accused and the victim although may not be wholly irrelevant, should be eschewed
in a case of this nature (abduction and rape of minor), particularly when Parliament
itself has laid down minimum sentence.
One of the principles that the judiciary had all along kept in its mind that rape being a
violation with violence of the private person of a woman causes mental scar, thus, not
only a physical injury but also a deep sense of some deathless shame is also
inflicted.116.
The Court cannot afford to be casual while imposing the sentence, inasmuch as both
the crime and the criminal are equally important in the sentencing process. The Courts
must see that the public does not lose confidence in the judicial system. Imposing
inadequate sentences will do more harm to the justice system and may lead to a state
where the victim loses confidence in the judicial system and resorts to private
vengeance.117.
6. Whipping.—This form of punishment is now abolished.
7. Detention in reformatories.—Juvenile offenders sentenced to imprisonment may be
sentenced to, and detained in, a Reformatory School for a period of three–seven
years.118.
[s 53.22] Detention during trial.—
Every confinement of a person and every restraint of the liberty of a free man is
imprisonment. Thus, "imprisonment" would include under trial detention. "Under trial
detention of a prisoner is undoubtedly an imprisonment."119.
[s 53.23] Postponement of sentence.—
Where all the members of the family of the deceased were convicted and nobody was
left to take care of his daughter, the Court upheld the sentence of the daughter's
grandmother but granted her six months' time to arrange for the daughter and then to
surrender to serve the sentence.120.
[s 53.24] Community Service for Avoiding Jail Sentence.—
Convicts in various countries, now, voluntarily come forward to serve the community,
especially in crimes relating to motor vehicles. Graver the crime greater the sentence.
But, serving the society actually is not a punishment in the real sense where the
convicts pay back to the community which he owes. Conduct of the convicts will not
only be appreciated by the community, it will also give a lot of solace to him, especially
in a case where because of one's action and inaction, human lives have been lost. In
the facts and circumstances of the case, where six human lives were lost, Court felt to
adopt this method would be good for the society rather than incarcerating the convict
further in jail. The Court ordered to do community service for two years, which will be
arranged by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment within two months. On
default, the convict will have to undergo simple imprisonment for two years.121.
[s 53.25] Probation.—
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 ('PO Act') is a milestone in the progress of the
modern liberal trend of reform in the field of penology. It is the result of the recognition
of the doctrine that the object of the criminal law is more to reform the individual
offender than to punish him. Broadly stated that the PO Act distinguishes offenders
below 21 years of age and those above that age, and offenders who are not guilty of
having committed an offence punishable with death or that imprisonment for life and
those who are guilty of a lesser offence. While in the case of offenders who are above
the age of 21 years absolute discretion is given to the Court to release them after
admonition or on probation of good conduct, subject to the conditions laid down in the
appropriate provisions of the PO Act. In case of offender below the age of 21 years, an
injunction is issued to the Court not to sentence them to imprisonment unless it is
satisfied that, having regard to the circumstances of the case, including the nature of
the offence and the character of the offenders, it is not desirable to deal with them
under sections 3 and 4 of the PO Act.122. The PO Act introduced a very basic change in
the criminal law of the country. At the same time, Courts were also to be careful about
the impact on the society consequent on letting offenders on probation. Indiscriminate
application of provisions of the PO Act to anti-social and white collar offenders may
have an adverse effect on the security of the society. Application of the PO Act is
specifically barred in some cases.123. Provisions of the PO Act should be applied
having regard to the nature of offence and age, character and antecedents of the
offender.124.
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, section 117 and Sch, for "Secondly—Transportation" (w.e.f. 1-1-
1956).
2. Clause "Thirdly" omitted by Act 17 of 1949, section 2 (w.e.f. 6-4-1949).
3. Shivaji v State of Maharashtra, 1973 Cr LJ 1783 : AIR 1973 SC 2622 [LNIND 1973 SC 249] .
4. Inder Singh v State, AIR 1978 SC 1091 : 1978 Cr LJ 766 (SC), see also Ram Prasad, 1980 Cr LJ
10 : AIR 1980 SC 83 [LNIND 1979 SC 404] ; Ashok Kumar, 1980 Cr LJ 444 : AIR 1980 SC 636
[LNIND 1980 SC 36] .
5. Alister Anthony Pareira v State of Maharashtra, 2012 Cr LJ 1160 : (2012) 2 SCC 648 [LNIND
2012 SC 15] : (2012) 1 SCC (Cr) 953 : AIR 2012 SC 3802 [LNIND 2012 SC 15] .
6. State of Punjab v Bawa Singh, 2015 Cr LJ 1701 .
7. UOI v Kuldeep Singh, AIR 2004 SC 827 [LNIND 2003 SC 1056] : (2004) 2 SCC 590 [LNIND
2003 SC 1056] ; State of MP v Ghanshyan Singh, JT 2003 (Supp.1 ) SC 129 : 2003 (8) SCC 13
[LNIND 2003 SC 772] ; Jashubha Bharatsinh Gohil v State of Gujarat, JT 1994 (3) SC 250 [LNIND
1994 SC 415] : 1994 (4) SCC 353 [LNIND 1994 SC 415] .
8. BG Goswami v Delhi Administration, 1974 (3) SCC 85 [LNIND 1973 SC 194] : AIR 1973 SC
1457 [LNIND 1973 SC 194] : 1973 SCC (Cr) 796 1974 Cr LJ 243 .
9. TK Gopal alias Gopi v State of Karnataka, AIR 2000 SC 1669 [LNIND 2000 SC 826] : (2000) 6
SCC 168 [LNIND 2000 SC 826] : JT 2000 (6) SC 177 [LNIND 2000 SC 826] : 2000 Cr LJ 2286 :
Sunil Batra (I) v Delhi Administration, AIR 1978 SC 1675 [LNIND 1978 SC 215] : (1978) 4 SCC 494
[LNIND 1978 SC 215] : 1979 (1) SCR 392 [LNIND 1978 SC 215] : ( 1978 Cr LJ 1741 ); Sunil Batra
(II) v Delhi Administration, AIR 1980 SC 1579 : (1980) 3 SCC 488 [LNIND 1978 SC 215] : 1980 (2)
SCR 557 [LNIND 1978 SC 215] : ( 1980 Cr LJ 1099 ); Charles Sobraj v Superintendent, Central Jail,
Tihar, AIR 1978 SC 1514 [LNIND 1978 SC 218] : ( 1978 Cr LJ 1534 ) and Francis Coralie Mullin v
The Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi, (1981) 1 SCC 608 [LNIND 1981 SC 27] : AIR 1981 SC
746 [LNIND 1981 SC 27] : 1981 (2) SCR 516 [LNIND 1981 SC 27] : ( 1981 Cr LJ 306 ) etc.
10. Karamjit Singh v State, AIR 2000 SC 3467 [LNIND 2000 SC 707] : (2001) 9 SCC 161 [LNIND
2000 SC 707] .
11. Dhannajoy Chatterjee v State of WB, (1994) (2) SCC 220 [LNIND 1994 SC 34] : 1994 (3) RCR
(Cr) 359 (SC).
12. Attorney General of India v Lachma Devi, 1986 Cr LJ 364 : AIR 1986 SC 467 .
13. Murray and Co v Ashok Kr Newatia, AIR 2000 SC 833 [LNIND 2000 SC 159] : (2000) 2 SCC
367 [LNIND 2000 SC 159] .
14. Karamjit Singh v State, AIR 2000 SC 3467 [LNIND 2000 SC 707] : (2001) 9 SCC 161 [LNIND
2000 SC 707] .
15. Mohammad Giasuddin v State of AP, (1977) 3 SCC 287 [LNIND 1977 SC 211] : AIR 1977 SC
1926 [LNIND 1977 SC 211] .
16. State of Gujarat v Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat, (1998) 7 SCC 392 [LNIND 1998 SC 920] : AIR
1998 SC 3164 [LNIND 1998 SC 920] : JT 1998 (6) SC 530 : 1998 Cr LJ 4561 .
17. Gurdeep Singh alias Deep v State, AIR 1999 SC 3646 [LNIND 1999 SC 837] : (2000) 1 SCC
498 [LNIND 1999 SC 837] : JT 1999 (7) SC 191 [LNIND 1999 SC 837] : 1999 Cr LJ 4573 .
18. State Tr PS Lodhi Colony New Delhi v Sanjeev Nanda, (2012) 8 SCC 450 [LNIND 2012 SC 459]
: 2012 Cr LJ 4174 : AIR 2012 SC 3104 [LNIND 2012 SC 459] .
19. UOI v Kuldeep Singh, AIR 2004 SC 827 [LNIND 2003 SC 1056] : (2004) 2 SCC 590 [LNIND
2003 SC 1056] .
20. Sahdev v Jaibar, (2009) 11 SCC 798 [LNIND 2009 SC 476] : (2010) 1 SCC (Cr) 215.
21. State of Karnataka v Krishnappa, 2000 Cr LJ 1793 : AIR 2000 SC 147 .
22. Mahesh v State of MP, AIR 1987 SC 1346 ; State of Punjab v Rakesh Kumar, AIR 2009 SC 391
[LNIND 2008 SC 1729] .
23. Gurdeep Singh alias Deep v State, AIR 1999 SC 3646 [LNIND 1999 SC 837] : (2000) 1 SCC
498 [LNIND 1999 SC 837] : JT 1999 (7) SC 191 [LNIND 1999 SC 837] : 1999 Cr LJ 4573 .
24. Mohd Arif v The Registrar, Supreme Court of India, 2014 Cr LJ 4598 .
25. State of HP v Nirmala Devi, AIR 2017 SC 1981 [LNIND 2017 SC 189] .
26. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
27. Alister Anthony Pareira v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2012 SC 3802 [LNIND 2012 SC 15] :
(2012) 2 SCC 648 [LNIND 2012 SC 15] : (2012) 1 SCC (Cr) 953 : 2012 Cr LJ 1160 .
28. State of HP v Nirmala Devi, AIR 2017 SC 1981 [LNIND 2017 SC 189] .
29. Alister Anthony Pareira v State of Maharashtra, 2012 Cr LJ 1160 : (2012) 2 SCC 648 [LNIND
2012 SC 15] : (2012) 1 SCC (Cr) 953 : AIR 2012 SC 3802 [LNIND 2012 SC 15] .
30. Sahdev v Jaibar, (2009) 11 SCC 798 [LNIND 2009 SC 476] : (2010) 1 SCC (Cr) 215.
31. Sahdev v Jaibar, (2009) 11 SCC 798 [LNIND 2009 SC 476] : (2010) 1 SCC (Cr) 215.
32. Alister Anthony Pareira v State of Maharashtra, 2012 Cr LJ 1160 : (2012) 2 SCC 648 [LNIND
2012 SC 15] : (2012) 1 SCC (Cr) 953 : AIR 2012 SC 3802 [LNIND 2012 SC 15] .
33. State of MP v Saleem alias Chamaru, 2005 (5) SCC 554 [LNIND 2005 SC 1070] 61.
34. C Muniappan v State of TN, (2010) 9 SCC 567 [LNIND 2010 SC 809] : AIR 2010 SC 3718
[LNIND 2010 SC 809] : (2010) 10 SCR 262 [LNIND 2010 SC 809] : (2010) 3 SCC (Cr) 1402.
35. Dinesh v State of Rajasthan, 2006 (3) SCC 771 [LNIND 2006 SC 151] : AIR 2006 SCW 1123 :
AIR 2006 SC 1267 [LNIND 2006 SC 151] .
36. Gurmukh Singh v State of Haryana, JT 2009 (11) SC 122 : 2009 (11) Scale 688 [LNIND 2009
SC 1725] .
37. Jameel v State of UP, 2010 Cr LJ 2106 : (2010) 12 SCC 532 [LNIND 2009 SC 1960] : AIR
2010 SC (Supp) 303 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cr) 582.
38. UOI v Kuldeep Singh, AIR 2004 SC 827 [LNIND 2003 SC 1056] : (2004) 2 SCC 590 [LNIND
2003 SC 1056] . Meaning of Judicial discretion explained.
39. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
40. State of HP v Nirmala Devi, AIR 2017 SC 1981 [LNIND 2017 SC 189] .
41. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
42. State v Narayan Bisoi, 1975 Cr LJ 1399 (Ori).
43. Javed Ahmed, 1983 Cr LJ 960 : AIR 1983 SC 594 [LNIND 1983 SC 119] : (1983) 3 SCC 39
[LNIND 1983 SC 119] : 1983 SCC (Cr) 559; see also Henry Westmuller, 1985 Cr LJ 1079 : AIR
1985 SC 823 [LNIND 1985 SC 105] : (1985) 3 SCC 291 [LNIND 1985 SC 105] ; Lok Pal Singh,
1985 Cr LJ 1134 (SC) : AIR 1985 SC 823 [LNIND 1985 SC 105] .
44. Munnalal, 1977 Cr LJ NOC 108 (MP).
45. Gauri Shanker Sharma v State of UP, AIR 1990 SC 709 [LNIND 1990 SC 8] : 1990 (2) SCC 502
[LNIND 1990 SC 100] , the acquittal granted by the High Court was set aside and the sentence of
7-year RI restored.
46. State v Balkrishna, 1992 Cr LJ 1872 (Mad).
47. State of UP v MK Anthony, 1985 Cr LJ 493 : AIR 1985 SC 48 . For an account of the
perplexities of criminal justice, see S Venugopal Rao, Perplexities of Criminal Justice, (1985) 27
JILI 458. See also Pandurang Dhondu Bhuwad v State of Maharashtra, 1991 Cr LJ 3177 Bom,
domestic servants committing day-light robberty in an apartment resulting in the death of an
inmate, life imprisonment, no concession for young age or poverty.
48. Guvala China Venkatesu v State of AP, AIR 1991 SC 1926 : 1991 Cr LJ 2326 .
49. Sevaka Perumal v State of TN, AIR 1991 SC 1463 [LNIND 1991 SC 269] : 1991 Cr LJ 1845 .
50. State of Rajasthan v Sukhpal Singh, (1983) 1 SCC 393 [LNIND 1982 SC 206] : 1983 SCC (Cr)
213 : AIR 1984 SC 207 [LNIND 1982 SC 206] ; Philip Bhimsen Aind v State, (1995) Cr LJ 1694
(Bom).
51. Babarali Ahmedali Sayed v State of Gujarat, 1991 Cr LJ 1269 Guj.
52. TM Joseph v State of Kerala, AIR 1992 SC 1922 : 1992 Cr LJ 3166 . The court referred to its
own decision in BC Goswami v Delhi Administration, AIR 1973 SC 1457 [LNIND 1973 SC 194] :
1974 Cr LJ 243 .
53. Ajit Kumar Vasantlal Zaveri v State of Gujarat, AIR 1992 SC 2064 : 1992 Cr LJ 3593 .
54. Gurmukh Singh v State of Haryana, 2010 Cr LJ 450 : AIR 2009 SC 2697 [LNIND 2009 SC 847]
.
55. State of MP v Sheikh Shahid, AIR 2009 SC 2951 [LNIND 2009 SC 867] : (2009) 12 SCC 715
[LNIND 2009 SC 867] : (2010) 1 SCC (Cr) 704.
56. UOI v Kuldeep Singh, AIR 2004 SC 827 [LNIND 2003 SC 1056] : (2004) 2 SCC 590 [LNIND
2003 SC 1056] .
57. Jitendra v State of Govt of NCT of Delhi, AIR 2018 SC 5253 [LNIND 2018 SC 537] .
58. Bachan Singh v State of Punjab, 1980 Cr LJ 636 : AIR 1980 SC 898 [LNIND 1980 SC 260] .
The minimum sentence awardable under section 302 being life imprisonment, it has been held
that the sentence cannot be reduced. Dori v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 3139 (All); Dadasaheb Misal
v State of Maharashtra, 1987 Cr LJ 1512 (Bom). See Triveniben v State of Gujarat, 1990 Cr LJ 273
(Guj); Sham Sunder v Puran, (1990) 4 SCC 731 [LNIND 1990 SC 994] : 1991 SCC (Cr) 38 : 1990 Cr
LJ 2600 ; Kannan v State of TN, 1989 Cr LJ 825 : AIR 1989 SC 396 [LNIND 1982 SC 73] : 1989
Supp (1) SCC 81 .
59. Laxman Naskar v State of WB, 2000 Cr LJ 4017 : AIR 2000 SC 2762 [LNIND 2000 SC 1180] .
60. State of Gujarat v Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat, 1998 Cr LJ 4561 : AIR 1998 SC 3164 [LNIND
1998 SC 920] .
61. For an example of early release see Iqbal Singh v State of Punjab, 1990 Cr LJ 1460 .
62. Act No. 13 of 2013 w.e.f 2 April 2013.
63. Mohd Arif v The Registrar, Supreme Court of India, 2014 Cr LJ 4598 : (2014) 9 SCC 737
[LNIND 2014 SC 769] .
64. R S Joshi v Ajit Mills, AIR 1977 SC 2279 [LNIND 1977 SC 260] : 1977 SCC (Tax) 536 : (1978)
1 SCJ 239 .
65. State of Maharashtra v Chandra Prakash Keshavdeo, 1991 Cr LJ 3187 (Bom).
66. Kapoor Lal v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 2159 (All).
67. Rajbir v State of Haryana, 1985 Cr LJ 1495 : 1985 Guj LH 117 : AIR 1985 SC 1278 . Referred
to in Dhansukh Chhotalal Joshi v State of Gujarat, 1990 Cr LJ 2333 to reduce the sentence of a
19 year- old boy convicted under section 304-II to that already undergone who was a member of
a party which caused death without any intention to do so.
68. State of Gujarat v Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat, (1998) 7 SCC 392 [LNIND 1998 SC 920] : AIR
1998 SC 3164 [LNIND 1998 SC 920] See the box.
69. Phool Kumari v Office of the Superintendent Central Jail, Tihar New Delhi, (2012) 8 SCC 183
[LNINDORD 2012 SC 410] : 2012 Cr LJ 4261 : AIR 2012 SC 3198 [LNINDORD 2012 SC 410] .
70. Constitution Bench in GV Godse v State, AIR 1961 SC 600 [LNIND 1961 SC 11] and Naib
Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1983 SC 855 [LNIND 1983 SC 116] .
71. State of Gujarat v Hon'ble High Court of Gujarat, (1998) 7 SCC 392 [LNIND 1998 SC 920] : AIR
1998 SC 3164 [LNIND 1998 SC 920] : JT 1998 (6) SC 530 : 1998 Cr LJ 4561 .
72. Bhuvan Mohan Patnaik v State of AP, (1975) 3 SCC 185 [LNIND 1974 SC 269] : AIR 1974 SC
2092 [LNIND 1974 SC 269] .
73. State of Maharashtra v Jethmat Himatmal Jain, 1994 Cr LJ 2613 (Bom).
74. Chanda Lal v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1992 SC 597 : 1992 Cr LJ 523 .
75. Ramanlal Baldevdas Shah v State of Gujarat, 1992 Cr LJ 3164 : AIR 1992 SC 1916 . See also
State of Karnataka v Bhojappa Hanamanthappa, 1994 Cr LJ 1543 .
76. Sushil Kumar Sanghi v State, 1995 Cr LJ 3457 (Del).
77. Babloo v State of MP, 1995 Cr LJ 3534 (MP). Jaya Mala v Home Secy, Govt of J&K, AIR 1982
SC 1297 [LNIND 1982 SC 109] : 1982 Cr LR (SC) 441 relied upon.
78. Pratapsingh Rathod v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 790 (Bom). Incident of causing stab
wound taking place 24 years back and the injury being of simple nature, the sentence was
reduced into one already undergone, Pritam Singh v State, 1996 Cr LJ 7 (Del).
79. Rasananda Bindhani v State of Orissa, 1992 Cr LJ 121 (Ori).
80. BY Deshmukh v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 1108 (Bom), relying on in Re Vadivel
Padayachi, 1972 Cr LJ 1641 (Mad).
81. Panchu Parida v State of Orissa, 1993 Cr LJ 953 (Ori). The court referred to Ippili Trinadha
Rao v State of AP, 1984 Cr LJ 1254 .
82. State of Orissa v Gangadhar Behuria, 1992 Cr LJ 3814 (Ori).
83. Dayaram v State of MP, 1992 Cr LJ 3154 (MP).
84. Madhuri Mukund Chitnis v Mukund Martand Chitnis, 1992 Cr LJ 111 (Bom).
85. Kashiram v Sonvati, 1992 Cr LJ 760 (MP).
86. MS Sheshappa v State of Karnataka, 1994 Cr LJ 3372 (Kant).
87. SC Bahri v State of Bihar, AIR 1994 SC 2020 : 1994 Cr LJ 3271 .
88. State v Banwari Lal, 1996 Cr LJ 1078 (Raj).
89. Manish Jalan v State of Karnataka, JT 2008 (7) SC 643 [LNIND 2008 SC 1396] .
90. Dilip S Dahanukar v Kotak Mahindra Co Ltd, ((2007) 6 SCC 528 [LNIND 2007 SC 451] 65) See
also Alister Anthony Pareira v State of Maharashtra, 2012 Cr LJ 1160 : (2012) 2 SCC 648 [LNIND
2012 SC 15] : (2012) 1 SCC (Cr) 953 : AIR 2012 SC 3802 [LNIND 2012 SC 15] .
91. State Tr PS Lodhi Colony New Delhi v Sanjeev Nanda, (2012) 8 SCC 450 [LNIND 2012 SC 459]
: 2012 Cr LJ 4174 : AIR 2012 SC 3104 [LNIND 2012 SC 459] .
92. Akhil Kumar v State of MP, 1992 Cr LJ 2029 (MP).
93. Madhukar Chandar v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 3281 (Bom).
94. Joshi v State of Kerala, 1996 Cr LJ 143 (Ker).
95. Sarup Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1995 SC 2452 : 1995 Cr LJ 4168 .
96. Raja Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1993 Cr LJ 1016 (Raj).
97. Lal Diwan v State of UP, 1995 Cr LJ 3899 (All).
98. Umesh Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 2000 SC 2111 [LNIND 2000 SC 871] : 2000 Cr LJ 6167 .
99. Shankar v State of TN, (1994) 4 SCC 478 [LNIND 1994 SC 377] : 1994 Cr LJ 3071 .
100. Sharomani Akali Dal (Mann) v State of JK, 1993 Cr LJ 927 (J&K).
101. Bhimabhai Kalabhai v State of Gujarat, 1992 Cr LJ 2585 (Guj).
102. Arjunan v State, 1993 Cr LJ 3113 (Mad).
103. Madhukar Damu Patil v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 1062 (Bom).
104. Jaivir Singh v State of UP, 1996 Cr LJ 1494 (All).
105. Dedekula Khabala Saheb v State of AP, 1996 Cr LJ 2196 (AP).
106. Gochipathula Samudralu v State of AP, 1992 Cr LJ 2488 (AP).
107. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
108. Jagat Bahadur v State of HP, 1994 Cr LJ 3396 (HP).
109. Paniben v State of Gujarat, AIR 1992 SC 1817 [LNIND 1992 SC 248] : 1992 Cr LJ 2919 .
110. Venkappa K Chowdari v State of Karnataka, 1996 Cr LJ 15 (Kant).
111. Jodha Khoda Rabari v State of Gujarat, 1992 Cr LJ 3298 (Guj).
112. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
113. Jameel v State of UP, 2010 Cr LJ 2106 : (2010) 12 SCC 532 [LNIND 2009 SC 1960] : AIR
2010 SC (Supp) 303 : (2011) 1 SCC (Cr) 582.
114. UOI v Kuldeep Singh, AIR 2004 SC 827 [LNIND 2003 SC 1056] : (2004) 2 SCC 590 [LNIND
2003 SC 1056] .
115. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
116. State of MP v Babu Natt, (2009) 2 SCC 272 [LNIND 2008 SC 2471] : (2009) 1 SCC (Cr) 713 :
AIR 2009 SC 1810 [LNIND 2008 SC 2471] : (2009) 1 Ker LJ 686 : 2009 Cr LJ 1722 .
117. State of Rajasthan v Mohan Lal, AIR 2018 SC 3564 .
118. Act VIII of 1897, section 8. Where the accused was a child of 14 at the time of the incident
and, therefore, the benefit of being sent to an approved school under the U.P. Children Act (1 of
1952) would have been available to him but he became a man of 28 by the time of the final
judgment, and, therefore, not fit for the school, his conviction was sustained and the sentence
reduced to already undergone. Pachrangi v State of UP, 1991 Cr LJ 3232 (All), relying on Bhoop
Ram v State of UP, 1989 All Cr R 276 : 1990 Cr LJ 2671 : AIR 1990 SC 1329 [LNIND 1990 SC 277]
.
119. Prahlad G Gajbhiye v State of Maharashtra, (1994) 2 Cr LJ 2555 at p 2561 (Bom).
120. Harkori v State of Rajasthan, 1998 Cr LJ 814 : AIR 1998 SC 2821 [LNIND 1997 SC 1368] .
121. State Tr PS Lodhi Colony New Delhi v Sanjeev Nanda, (2012) 8 SCC 450 [LNIND 2012 SC
459] : 2012 Cr LJ 4174 : AIR 2012 SC 3104 .
122. Rattan Lal v State of Punjab, AIR 1965 SC 444 [LNIND 1964 SC 135] : 1964 (7) SCR 676
[LNIND 1964 SC 135] : 1965 (1) Cr LJ 360 ; DalbirSingh v State of Haryana, AIR 2000 SC 1677
[LNIND 2000 SC 810] : 2000 (5) SCC 82 [LNIND 2000 SC 810] : 2000 Cr LJ 2283 .
123. Nalinakshan v Rameshan, 2009 Cr LJ 1703 (Ker).
124. MCD v State of Delhi, 2005 (4) SCC 605 [LNIND 2005 SC 445] : AIR 2005 SC 2658 [LNIND
2005 SC 445] : 2005 SCC (Cr) 1322 : 2005 Cr LJ3077; Sitaram Paswan v State of Bihar, 2005 (13)
SCC 110 [LNIND 2005 SC 703] : AIR 2005 SC 3534 [LNIND 2005 SC 703] : 2005 Cr LJ 4135 .