Criminal force.
Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person's consent, in
order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause,
or knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or
annoyance to the person to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal force to
that other.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus
intentionally causes the boat to drift down the stream. Here A intentionally
causes motion to Z, and he does this by disposing substances in such a manner
that the motion is produced without any other act on on any person's part. A has
therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z's
consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending or knowing it to
be likely that this use of force will cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has
used criminal force to Z.
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z's horses, and thereby causes them to quicken
their pace. Here Z has caused change of motion to Z by inducing the animals to
change their motion. A has therefore used force to Z; and if A has done this
without Z's consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby
injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z.
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the
palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of motion to Z, and he has done this by
his own bodily power. A has therefore used force to Z; and as A has acted thus
intentionally, without Z's consent, in order to the commission of an offence. A
has used criminal force to Z.
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own bodily
power moved his own person so as to bring it into contact with Z. He has
therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z's
consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten
or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus
brought into contact with Z, or with Z's clothes, or with something carried by Z,
or that it will strike water, and dash up the water against Z's clothes or
something carried by Z. Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of
causing any substance to come into contact with Z, or Z's clothes. A has used
force to Z; and if he did so without Z's consent, intending thereby to injure,
frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z.
(f) A intentionally pulls up a woman's veil. Here, A intentionally uses force to her,
and if he does so without her consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he
may thereby injure, frighten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her.
(g) Z is bathing, A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here A
intentionally by his own bodily power causes such motion in the boiling water as
brings that water into contact with Z, or with other water so situated that such
contact must affect Z's sense of feeling; A has therefore intentionally used force
to Z; and if he has done this without Z's consent, intending or knowing it to be
likely that he may thereby cause injury, fear, or annoyance to Z, A has used
criminal force.
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z's consent. Here, if A intends to cause
injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses criminal force to Z.
COMMENT.—
The preceding section defines 'force'. This section says that 'force' becomes criminal
(1) when it is used without consent and in order to the committing of an offence, or (2)
when it is intentionally used to cause injury, fear or annoyance to another to whom the
force is used. To attract the definition of 'criminal force' under section 350 IPC, 1860,
there must be intentional use of force on any person, without that person's consent.
Such force must have been used for committing an offence, or intending to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or
annoyance to the person on whom the force is used. In other words, the criminal force
contemplated under this section is intended to mean criminal force as applied to a
person and not as applied to an inanimate object or substance.962. A person is said to
use force when he causes motion or change of motion or cessation of motion to
another person or the above in substance, which brings it into contact with any part of
the other person's body or with anything that the other is wearing or carrying, or with
anything so situated that such contact affects other's sense of feeling. This should be
done by his own bodily power or by use of some substance or by inducing any animal
to change this motion. The use of force will become criminal when it is done against
the consent of any person with the intention of committing an offence or to cause
injury, fear or annoyance to any person. In this case admittedly no assault was resorted
to.963.
The term 'criminal force' includes what in English law is called 'battery'. It will, however,
be remembered that 'criminal force' may be so slight as not to amount to an offence
(section 95), and it will be observed that 'criminal force' does not include anything that
the doer does by means of another person. The definition of 'criminal force' is so wide
as to include force of almost every description of which a person is the ultimate object.
[s 350.1] Ingredients.—
The section requires—
(1) The intentional use of force to any person.
(2) Such force must have been used without the person's consent.
(3) The force must have been used—
(a) in order to the committing of an offence; or
(b) with the intention to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will cause,
injury, fear or annoyance to the person to whom it is used.
[s 350.2] Illustrations.—
The various illustrations exemplify the different ingredients of the definition of 'force'
given in section 349. Illustration (a) exemplifies 'motion'; ill. (b), 'change of motion'; ill.
(c), 'cessation of motion'; ills. (d), (e), (g) and (h), 'bring that substance into contact with
any part of that other's body'; ills. (j) and (g) 'other's sense of feeling'. Clause 1 of
section 349 is illustrated by ills. (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g); clause 2 by ill, (a); and clause 3,
by ills. (b) and (h).
The petitioners had picked up or snatched the ballot papers from the custody and
possession of the public servants. They had even torn the same in this process. It was
held that they used criminal force.964.
962. Devaki Amma v State, 1981 Ker LT 475 .
963. S P Mallik v State of Orissa, 1982 Cr LJ 19 (Pat)
964. Bhupinder Singh v State of Punjab, 1997 Cr LJ 3416 (PH).