Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.
Whoever knowingly or negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire, any
person by water in any vessel, when that vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to
endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both.
COMMENT.—
This section provides against the negligence of common carriers by water. Where a
person, with the assistance of two others, plied a ferryboat, which was out of order and
had a crack, and he took in one hundred passengers, and consequently the boat was
upset, and seven persons were drowned, it was held that the accused had committed
an offence under this section.77. Where the lessee of a public ferry knew that boats
were usually overloaded but took no steps against it and allowed his boatmen to
overload them as they liked and in consequence, a boat sank with some passengers, it
was held that the lessee was guilty of criminal negligence and liable under this
section.78. Where a launch, which was overloaded with passengers, capsized at the
jetty owing to the onrush of persons waiting at the jetty to get on deck and the
passengers on the launch wanting to get down at the jetty, resulting in displacement of
balance of the launch, it was held that the capsizing of the launch was not because of
any negligence of the owners or the master and, therefore, their conviction under this
section could not be sustained.79. The owner who knowingly or negligently allows
overloading of his boat so as to endanger the life of the persons therein will be liable
under section 282, Penal Code.80.
There is no provision in the Code for the negligence of a common carrier by land.
77. Khoda Jagta, (1864) 1 BHC (Cr C) 137.
78. Tofel Ahmad Miya, (1933) 61 Cal 253 .
79. VR Bhate, AIR 1970 SC 1362 : 1970 Cr LJ 1261 .
80. Re K S M Mohammad Abdul Kadar Marakayar, 1950 Cr LJ 729 (Mad).