Defamation.
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible
representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending
to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the
reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to
defame that person.
Explanation 1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased
person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is
intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation 2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a
company or an association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically,
may amount to defamation.
Explanation 4.—No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that
imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or
intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect
of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be
believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally
considered as disgraceful.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A says—"Z is an honest man; he never stole B's watch"; intending to cause it to
be believed that Z did steal B's watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within
one of the exceptions.
(b) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be
believed that Z stole B's watch. This is defamation unless it falls within one of
the exceptions.
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, intending it to be believed
that Z stole B's watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the
exceptions.
Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published.
First Exception.—It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning
any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or
published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact.
Public conduct of public servants.
Second Exception.—It is not defamation to express in a good faith any opinion
whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public
functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that
conduct, and no further.
Conduct of any person touching any public question.
Third Exception.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion
whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching any public question, and
respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no
further.
ILLUSTRATION
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z's
conduct in petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a
meeting on a public question, in presiding or attending a such meeting, in forming or
joining any society which invites the public support, in voting or canvassing for a
particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharges of the duties of which
the public is interested.
Publication of reports of proceedings of Courts.
Fourth Exception.—It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the
proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such proceedings.
Explanation.—A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an inquiry in open
Court preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of
the above section.
Merits of a case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned.
Fifth Exception.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion
whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been
decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party,
witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as
far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A says—"I think Z's evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be
stupid or dishonest". A is within this exception if he says this is in good faith, in
as much as the opinion which he expresses respects Z's character as it appears
in Z's conduct as a witness, and no further.
(b) But if A says—"I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him
to be a man without veracity"; A is not within this exception, in as much as the
opinion which he expresses of Z's character, is an opinion not founded on Z's
conduct as a witness.
Merits of public performance.
Sixth Exception.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion
respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the
judgment of the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his
character appears in such performance, and no further.
Explanation.—A performance may be substituted to the judgment of the public
expressly or by acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the
judgment of the public.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public.
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of
the public.
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing
to the judgment of the public.
(d) A says of a book published by Z—"Z's book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z's
book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind". A is within the exception, if
he says this in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z
respects Z's character only so far as it appears in Z's book, and no further.
(e) But if A says—"I am not surprised that Z's book is foolish and indecent, for he is
a weak man and a libertine". A is not within this exception, inasmuch as the
opinion which he expresses of Z's character is an opinion not founded on Z's
book.
Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over another.
Seventh Exception.—It is not defamation in a person having over another any
authority, either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract made with
that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of that other in
matters to which such lawful authority relates.
ILLUSTRATION
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court;
a head of a department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders; a
parent censuring in good faith a child in the presence of other children; a schoolmaster,
whose authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in the
presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in
service; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the conduct of
such cashier as such cashier—are within this exception.
Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.
Eighth Exception.—It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation
against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person
with respect to the subject-matter of accusation.
ILLUSTRATION
If A in good faith accuse Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the
conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z,
a child, to Z's father—A is within this exception.
Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests.
Ninth Exception.—It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of
another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of
the interests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public
good.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business—"Sell nothing to Z unless
he pays you ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty". A is within the
exception, if he has made this imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of
his own interests.
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report of his own superior officer, casts an
imputation on the character of Z. Here, if the imputation is made in good faith,
and for the public good, A is within the exception.
Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good.
Tenth Exception.—It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one
person against another, provided that such caution be intended for the good of
the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is
interested, or for the public good.
COMMENT.—
Section 499 Indian Penal Code (IPC, 1860) brings under the criminal law, the person
who publishes as well as the person who makes the defamatory imputation. Section
499, IPC, 1860 emphasises the words "makes or publishes". The gist of the offence of
defamation lies in the dissemination of the harmful imputation. When a defamatory
statement is published, it is not only the publisher, but also the maker who becomes
responsible and it is in that context that the word "makes" is used in section 499 IPC,
1860. It is of essence that in order to constitute the offence of defamation, it must be
communicated to a third person because what is intended by the imputation is to
arouse hostility of others. Therefore, in brief, the essentials of defamation are, first, the
words must be defamatory; second, they must refer to the aggrieved party; third, they
must be maliciously published.1.
[s 499.1] Reputation.—
Right to reputation is a facet of right to life of a citizen under Article 21 of the
Constitution.2. The right to enjoyment of a private reputation, unassailed by malicious
slander is of ancient origin, and is necessary to human society. A good reputation is an
element of personal security, and is protected by the Constitution equally with the right
to the enjoyment of life, liberty and property.3. The term 'person' includes not only the
physical body and members but also every bodily sense and personal attribute among
which is the reputation a man has acquired. Reputation can also be defined to be good
name, the credit, honour or character which is derived from a favourable public opinion
or esteem, and character by report. The right to enjoyment of a good reputation is a
valuable privilege of ancient origin and necessary to human society. 'Reputation' is an
element of personal security and is protected by Constitution equally with the right to
enjoyment of life, liberty and property. Although, 'character' and 'reputation' are often
used synonymously, these terms are distinguishable. 'Character' is what a man is and
'reputation' is what he is supposed to be in what people say he is. 'Character' depends
on attributes possessed and 'reputation' on attributes which others believe one to
possess. The former signifies reality and the latter merely what is accepted to be reality
at present.4.
[s 499.2] Constitutional validity.—
The Constitutional validity of sections 499 and 500 of IPC, 1860 and section 199 of
Code of Criminal Procedure, (Cr PC, 1973) was assailed in Subramanian Swamy v UOI,
Ministry of Law,5. and the Supreme Court upheld it. The Court observed thus:
One cannot be unmindful that right to freedom of speech and expression is a highly valued
and cherished right but the Constitution conceives of reasonable restriction. In that context
criminal defamation which is in existence in the form of ss. 499 and 500 Indian Penal Code
is not a restriction on free speech that can be characterized as disproportionate. Right to
free speech cannot mean that a citizen can defame the other. Protection of reputation is a
fundamental right. It is also a human right. Cumulatively it serves the social interest.
The Apex Court did not accept that the provisions relating to criminal defamation are
not saved by the doctrine of proportionality, because it determines a limit which is not
impermissible within the criterion of reasonable restriction. The Court also held that the
criminal prosecution on defamation will not negate and violate the right to speech and
expression of opinion.
1. BRK Murthy v State, 2013 Cr LJ 1602 (AP).
2. Mehmood Azam v State, AIR 2012 SC 2573 [LNIND 2012 SC 456] : (2012) 8 SCC 1 [LNIND
2012 SC 456] ; Vishwanath S/o Sitaram Agrawal v Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal, AIR 2010 SC 1974
[LNINDORD 2010 SC 207] : 2010 (7) SCC 263 [LNIND 2010 SC 438] .
3. Smt. Kiran Bedi v Committee of Inquiry, AIR 1995 SC 117 [LNIND 1994 SC 929] : 1994 (6) SCC
565 [LNIND 1994 SC 952] : 1995 SCC (Cr) 29, quoted from D F Marion v Davis, 1989 (1) SCC 494
[LNIND 1989 SC 10] : AIR 1989 SC 714 [LNIND 1989 SC 833] .
4. Kishore Samrite v State of UP, (2013) 2 SCC 398 [LNIND 2012 SC 657] .
5. Subramanian Swamy v UOI, Ministry of Law, 2016 Cr LJ 3214 : 2016 (5) SCJ 643 .