Trafficking of person
(1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, (a) recruits, (b) transports, (c)
harbours, (d) transfers, or (e) receives, a person or persons, by—
First.—using threats, or
Secondly.—using force, or any other form of coercion, or Thirdly.—by abduction,
or
Fourthly.—by practising fraud, or deception, or
Fifthly.—by abuse of power, or
Sixthly.—by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or
benefits, in order to achieve the consent of any person having control over the
person recruited, transported, harboured, transferred or received,
commits the offence of trafficking.
Explanation 1.—The expression "exploitation" shall include any act of physical
exploitation or other form of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to
slavery, servitude, or the forced removal of organs.
Explanation 2.—The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the
offence of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a minor, it shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years,
but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one minor, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
fourteen years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also
be liable to fine.
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of minor on more than one
occasion, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which
shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and
shall also be liable to fine.
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any
person, then such public servant or police officer shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person's natural life and shall also be liable to fine.]
COMMENTS
1. Amendment of 2013.—Vide the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act 2013 (Act 13 of
2013), the entire section has been changed so as to enlarge the scope of the offence
and include within its purview not just the mischief of slavery, but trafficking in general
—of minors and also adults, and also forced or bonded labour, prostitution, organ
transplantation and to some extent child-marriages.1154.
For the purposes of this new offence, an offender has been classified into five
categories, thus covering every aspect of the commission of such offences. A person
can be held liable within the mischief of this offence if he either (i) recruits, or (ii)
transports, (iii) harbours, (iv) transfers, or (v) receives, a person or persons.
COMMENT.—
The sections of the Code relating to slavery were enacted for the suppression of
slavery, not only in its strict and proper sense, namely, that condition whereby an
absolute and unlimited power is given to the master over the life, fortune and liberty of
another, but in any modified form where an absolute power is asserted over the liberty
of another.1155.
[s 370.1] Ingredients.—
This section makes penal—
(1) the importation, exportation, removal, buying, selling of a person as a slave;
(2) the disposal of a person as a slave; and
(3) the acceptation, reception, or detention, of any person against his will as a slave.
1153. Sections 370 and 370A subs. for section 370 by the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act,
2013 (13 of 2013), section 8 (w.e.f. 3 February 2013). Prior to substitution by section 8 of the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013 (w.e.f. 3 February 2013), section 370 stood as under: