Murder.
Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by
which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or—
Secondly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender
knows to be likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or—
Thirdly.—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the
bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death, or—
Fourthly.—If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous
that it must, in all probability, cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause
death, and commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing
death or such injury as aforesaid.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits
murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause
his death, strikes him with the intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in
consequence of the blow. A is guilty of murder, although the blow might not
have been sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a
person in a sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is labouring under
any disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of nature
kill a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he may intend to cause
bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or such
bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death
of a man in the ordinary course of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here, A is
guilty of murder, although he may not have intended to cause Z's death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills
one of them. A is guilty of murder, although he may not have had a premeditated
design to kill any particular individual.
When culpable homicide is not murder.
Exception 1.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, whilst deprived of
the power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death of
the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by
mistake or accident. The above exception is subject to the following provisos:—
First.—That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender
as an excuse for killing or doing harm to any person.
Secondly.—That the provocation is not given by anything done in obedience to the
law, or by a public servant in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public
servant.
Thirdly.—That the provocation is not given by anything done in the lawful exercise
of the right of private defence.
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent
the offence from amounting to murder is a question of fact.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z,
intentionally kills Y, Z's child. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was
not given by the child, and the death of the child was not caused by accident or
misfortune in doing an act caused by the provocation.
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation, fires a pistol
at Y, neither intending nor knowing himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him,
but out of sight. A kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely culpable
homicide.
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion by
the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the provocation was given
by a thing done by a public servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as witness before Z, a Magistrate, Z says that he does not believe a
word of A's deposition, and that A has perjured himself. A is moved to sudden
passion by these words, and kills Z. This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z's nose, Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence, lays
hold of A to prevent him from doing so. A is moved to sudden and violent
passion in consequence, and kills Z. This is murder, in as much as the
provocation was given by a thing done in the exercise of the right of private
defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a bystander,
intending to take advantage of B's rage, and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife
into B's hand for that purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have
committed only culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder.
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, in the exercise in
good faith of the right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the
power given to him by law and causes the death of the person against whom he
is exercising such right of defence without premeditation, and without any
intention of doing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such
defence.
ILLUSTRATION
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A.
A draws out a pistol. Z persists in the assault. A believing in good faith that he
can by no other means prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z
dead. A has not committed murder, but only culpable homicide.
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public
servant or aiding a public servant acting for the advancement of public justice,
exceeds the powers given to him by law, and causes death by doing an act
which he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and necessary for the due
discharge of his duty as such public servant and without ill-will towards the
person whose death is caused.
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without
premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel
and without the offender having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or
unusual manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation
or commits the first assault.
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is
caused, being above the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk
of death with his own consent.
ILLUSTRATION
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes, Z, a person under eighteen years of age, to
commit suicide. Here, on account of Z's youth, he was incapable of giving
consent to his own death; A has therefore abetted murder.
COMMENT.—
In this section, the definition of culpable homicide appears in an expanded form. Each
of the four clauses requires that the act which causes death should be done
intentionally, or with the knowledge or means of knowing that death is a natural
consequence of the act. An intention to kill is not always necessary to make out a case
of murder. A knowledge that the natural and probable consequence of an act would be
death will suffice for a conviction under section 302, IPC, 1860.31.
[s 300.1] Scope.—
An offence cannot amount to murder unless it falls within the definition of culpable
homicide; for this section merely points out the cases in which culpable homicide is
murder. But an offence may amount to culpable homicide without amounting to
murder.
It does not follow that a case of culpable homicide is murder, because it does not fall
within any of the Exceptions to section 300. To render culpable homicide murder, the
case must come within the provisions of clauses 1, 2, 3, or 4 of section 300 and must
not fall within any one of the five Exceptions attached thereto.
[s 300.2] Culpable homicide and murder distinguished.—
The distinction between these two offences is very ably set forth by Melvill, J, in
Govinda's case32. and by Sarkaria, J, in Punnayya's case.33. Since the decision of the
Supreme Court is the law of the land by virtue of Article 141 of the Constitution,
relevant passages from Punnayya's case are reproduced below for the guidance of all
concerned.
In the scheme of the Penal Code, 'culpable homicide' is genus and 'murder' its specie. All
'murder' is 'culpable homicide' but not vice versa. Speaking generally 'culpable homicide
sans 'special characteristics of murder' is culpable homicide not amounting to murder'. For
the purpose of fixing punishment, proportionate to the gravity of this generic offence, the
Code practically recognises three degrees of culpable homicide. The first is, what may be
called, culpable homicide of the first degree. This is the gravest form of culpable homicide
which is defined in s. 300 as 'murder'. The second may be termed as 'culpable homicide of
the second degree'. This is punishable under the 1st part ofs. 304. Then, there is 'culpable
homicide of the third degree'. This is the lowest type of culpable homicide and the
punishment provided for it is also the lowest among the punishments provided for the three
grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable under the Second Part of s. 304.
The academic distinction between 'murder' and 'culpable homicide not amounting to
murder' has vexed the Courts for more than a century. The confusion is caused, if
Courts losing sight of the true scope and meaning of the terms used by the legislature
in these sections allow themselves to be drawn into minute abstractions. The safest
way of approach to the interpretation and application of these provisions seems to be
keeping in focus the key words used in the various clauses of sections 299 and 300.
The following comparative table will be helpful in appreciating the points of distinction
between the two offences.
Section 299 Section 300
A person commits culpable homicide if the act Subject to certain exceptions, culpable
by which the death is caused is done - homicide is murder if the act by which the
death is caused is done -
INTENTION
(a) with the intention of causing death; or (1) with the intention of causing death; or
(b) with the intention of causing such bodily (2) with the intention of causing such bodily
injury as is likely to cause death; or injury as the offender knows to be likely to
cause the death of the person to whom the
harm is caused; or
(3) with the intention of causing bodily injury to
any person and the bodily injury intended to be
inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of
nature to cause death; or
KNOWLEDGE
(c) with the knowledge that the act is likely to (4) with the knowledge that the act is so
cause death. imminently dangerous that it must in all
probability cause death or such bodily injury as
is likely to cause death, and without any excuse
or incurring the risk of causing death or such
injury as is mentioned above.
Clause (b) of section 299 corresponds with clauses (2) and (3) of section 300. The
distinguishing feature of the mens rea requisite under clause (2) is the knowledge
possessed by the offender regarding the particular victim being in such a peculiar
condition or state of health that the intentional harm caused to him is likely to be fatal,
notwithstanding the fact that such harm would not in the ordinary way of nature be
sufficient to cause death of a person in normal health or condition. It is noteworthy that
the 'intention to cause death' is not an essential requirement of clause (2). Only the
intention of causing the bodily injury coupled with the offender's knowledge of the
likelihood of such injury causing the death of the particular victim is sufficient to bring
the killing within the ambit of this clause. This aspect of clause (2) is borne out by
Illustration (b) appended to section 300.
Clause (b) of section 299 does not postulate any such knowledge on the part of the
offender. Instances of cases falling under clause (2) of section 300 can be where the
assailant causes death by a fist blow intentionally given knowing that the victim is
suffering from an enlarged liver, or enlarged spleen or diseased heart and such blow is
likely to cause death of that particular person as a result of the rupture of the liver, or
spleen or the failure of the heart, as the case may be. If the assailant had no such
knowledge about the disease or special frailty of the victim, nor an intention to cause
death or bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, the
offence will not be murder, even if the injury which caused the death, was intentionally
given.
In clause (3) of section 300, instead of the words, 'likely to cause death' occurring in the
corresponding clause (b) of section 299, the words "sufficient in the ordinary course of
nature" have been used. Obviously, the distinction lies between a bodily injury likely to
cause death and a bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
death. The distinction is fine but real, and, if overlooked, may result in miscarriage of
justice. The difference between clause (b) of section 299 and clause (3) of section 300
is one of the degree of probability of death resulting from the intended bodily injury. To
put it more broadly, it is the degree of probability of death which determines whether a
culpable homicide is of the gravest, medium or the lowest degree. The word "likely" in
clause (b) of section 299 conveys the sense of 'probable' as distinguished from a mere
possibility. The words 'bodily injury... sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
'death' mean that death will be the most probable result of the injury, having regard to
the ordinary course of nature.
For cases to fall within clause (3), it is not necessary that the offender intended to
cause death, so long as the death ensues from the intentional bodily injury or injuries
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
Clause (c) of section 299 and clause (4) of section 300 both require knowledge of the
probability of the act causing death. It is not necessary for the purpose of this case to
dilate much on the distinction between these corresponding clauses. It will be
sufficient to say that clause (4) of section 300 would be applicable where the
knowledge of the offender as to the probability of death of a person in general as
distinguished from a particular person or persons being caused from his imminently
dangerous act, approximates to a practical certainty. Such knowledge on the part of the
offender must be of the highest degree of probability, the act having been committed
by the offender without any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury
as aforesaid.34.
In Ajit Singh v State of Punjab,35. the Supreme Court observed that:
In order to hold whether an offence would fall u/s. 302 or s. 304 Part I of the Code, the
Courts have to be extremely cautious in examining whether the same falls u/s. 300 of the
Code which states whether a culpable homicide is murder, or would it fall under its five
exceptions which lay down when culpable homicide is not murder.
In other words, section 300 states both, what is murder and what is not. First finds
place in section 300 in its four stated categories, while the second finds detailed
mention in the stated five Exceptions to section 300. The legislature in its wisdom,
thus, covered the entire gamut of culpable homicide 'amounting to murder' as well as
that 'not amounting to murder' in a composite manner in section 300 of the Code.36.
From the above conspectus, it emerges that whenever a Court is confronted with the
question of whether the offence is 'murder' or 'culpable homicide not amounting to
murder' on the facts of a case, it will be convenient for it to approach the problem in
three stages. The question to be considered at the first stage would be, whether the
accused has done an act by doing which he has caused the death of another. Proof of
such causal connection between the act of the accused and the death leads to the
second stage for considering whether that act of the accused amounts to "culpable
homicide" as defined in section 299. If the answer to this question is prima facie found
in the affirmative, the stage for considering the operation of section 300, IPC, 1860, is
reached. This is the stage at which the Court should determine whether the facts
proved by the prosecution bring the case within the ambit of any of the four clauses of
the definition of 'murder' contained in section 300. If the answer to this question is in
the negative, the offence would be 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder',
punishable under the first or the second part of section 304, depending, respectively, on
whether the second or the third clause of section 299 is applicable. If this question is
found in the positive, but the case comes within any of the Exceptions enumerated in
section 300, the offence would still be 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder',
punishable under the first part of section 304, IPC, 1860.
The above are only broad guidelines and not cast-iron imperatives. In most cases, their
observance will facilitate the task of the Court. But sometimes the facts are so
intertwined and the second and the third stages so telescoped into each other, that it
may not be convenient to give a separate treatment to the matters involved in the
second and third stages.
To sum up:
Section 299 is divided into three parts. The first part refers to the act by which the death is
caused by being done with the intention of causing death. That part corresponds to the first
part of the section 300, IPC. The second part of section 299, IPC speaks of the intention to
cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. This has corresponding provisions in
clauses "Secondly" and "Thirdly" of section 300, IPC, section 304, Part I, IPC, covers cases
which by reason of the Exceptions under section 300, IPC, are taken out of the purview of
cls. (1), (2) and (3) of section 300, IPC, but otherwise would fall within it and also cases
which fall within the second part of section 299 but not within section 300 clauses (2) and
(3). The third part of section 299 corresponds to "fourthly" of section s. 300. Section 304,
Part-II, IPC, covers those cases which fall within the third part of section 299 but do not fall
within the fourth clause of section 300.37.
Section 300 states both, what is murder and what is not. First finds place in section
300 in its four stated categories, while the second finds detailed mention in the stated
five Exceptions to section 300. The legislature in its wisdom, thus, covered the entire
gamut of culpable homicide 'amounting to murder' as well as that 'not amounting to
murder' in a composite manner in section 300 of the Code.38.
[s 300.3] Clause 1.— 'Act by which the death is caused is done with the
intention of causing death'.—
The word 'act' includes omission as well (section 33). Any omission by which death is
caused will be punishable as if the death is caused directly by an act.39. Thus, where a
person neglected to provide his child with proper sustenance although repeatedly
warned of the consequences and the child died, it was held to be murder.40. Intention
to cause death may be revealed by the whole circumstances of the story.
[s 300.4] Honour Killing.—
In Shakti Vahini v UOI,41. the Supreme Court observed that honour killing is not the
singular type of offence. It is a grave one but not the lone one. It is a part of honour
crime. Honour crime is the genus and honour killing is the species, although a
dangerous facet of it. In Arumugam Servai v State of TN,42. the Supreme Court strongly
deprecated the practice of khap/katta panchayats taking law into their own hands and
indulging in offensive activities which endanger the personal lives of the persons
marrying according to their choice.43. Law Commission of India studied the matter and
submitted the 242nd report to the Government. Some proposals are being mooted
proposing amendments to section 300, IPC, 1860 by way of including what is called
'Honour Killing' as murder and shifting the burden of proof to the accused. But the
Commission expressed the view that there is no need for introducing a provision in
section 300, IPC, 1860 in order to bring the so called 'honour killings' within the ambit of
this provision. According to the report, the existing provisions in IPC, 1860 are
adequate enough to take care of the situations leading to overt acts of killing or
causing bodily harm to the targeted person who allegedly undermined the honour of
the caste or community. The commission suggested a new law (instead of amending
IPC, 1860) to tackle the problem namely "Prohibition of Interference with the Freedom
of Matrimonial Alliances Bill 2011".44.
In Shakti Vahini v UOI,45. the Supreme Court observed that torture or torment or ill-
treatment in the name of honour that tantamounts to atrophy of choice of an individual
relating to love and marriage by any assembly is illegal and cannot be allowed a
moment of existence. In this case, the Supreme Court issued detailed preventive,
remedial and punitive directives to prevent honour killings in the country.
[s 300.5] Clause 2.—'With the intention of causing such bodily injury as the
offender knows to be likely to cause the death'.—
This clause applies where the act by which death is caused is done with the intention
of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of the
person to whom the harm is caused. It applies in special cases where the person
injured is in such a condition or state of health that his or her death would be likely to
be caused by an injury which would not ordinarily cause the death of a person in sound
health and where the person inflicting the injury knows that owing to such condition or
state of health it is likely to cause the death of the person injured. In a case involving
attack with sulphuric acid causing "grievous injury" where the doctor testified that such
an attack may also cause death, the Court said that "the word likely means 'probably'
and can easily be distinguished from 'possibly'. When the chances of a thing happening
are very high, we say that it will most probably happen".46.
[s 300.6] Poisoning.—
In a case of murder by poisoning, the prosecution must establish (1) that death took
place by poisoning, (2) that the accused had the poison in his possession, and (3) that
the accused had an opportunity to administer poison to the deceased.47. These
propositions were laid down by the Supreme Court in Dharambir Singh v State of Punjab,
Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958, decided, Nov. 4, 1958 SC48. and were given anxious
consideration by Hidayatullah, J, in Anant Chintaman Lagu v State of Bombay.49. The
learned judge (afterwards CJ) did not consider them as invariable criteria of proof to be
established by the prosecution in every case of murder by poisoning. This is so
"because", as the learned judge said:
evidently if after poisoning the victim, the accused destroyed all traces of the body, the first
proposition would be incapable of being proved except by circumstantial evidence. Similarly,
if the accused gave a victim something to eat and the victim died immediately on the
ingestion of that food with symptoms of poisoning and poison, found in the viscera, the
requirement of proving that the accused was possessed of the poison would follow the
circumstance that the accused gave the victim something to eat and need not be separately
proved.
Following this opinion in the case of Bhupinder Singh v State of Punjab50. and
dispensing with the need for proof of possession of poison, the Supreme Court said
that:
we do not consider it necessary that there should be acquittal on the failure of the
prosecution to prove possession of poison with the accused. Murder by poison is invariably
committed under the cover and cloak of secrecy. Nobody will administer poison to another
in the presence of others. The person who administers poison..... will not keep a portion of it
for the investigating officer to come and collect it.... [He] would naturally take care to
eliminate and destroy the evidence against him.... It would be impossible for the
prosecution to prove possession of poison with the accused. The prosecution may,
however, establish other circumstances consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of
the accused. The Court then would not be justified in acquitting the accused on the ground
that the prosecution has failed to prove possession of poison with the accused.
Continuing further, Shetty, J said:
The poison murder cases are not to be put outside the rule of circumstantial evidence.
There may be very many obvious facts and circumstances in which the Court may be
justified in drawing permissible inference that the accused was in possession of the poison
in question.... The insistence on proof of possession of poison... invariably in every case is
neither desirable nor practicable. It would mean to introduce an extraneous ingredient to the
offence of murder by poisoning.
Where, therefore, neither motive nor administration of poison nor its possession by the
accused could be proved, the accused had to be acquitted.51. Where it is proved that
the accused administered poison, the accused must be presumed to have knowledge
that his act was likely to cause death.52. If the prosecution failed to prove the cause of
death, the fact that the accused failed to explain the cause of death cannot be the
basis of conviction. Accused was acquitted where neither post-mortem report nor FSL
report showed the administration of poison.53. Where the allegation was that the death
was caused by poison mixed with alcohol, but no remnants of poisonous substance
were found either in the two bottles or in the steel glass but were found only in the
earth so collected from the place of occurrence, accused acquitted.54.
[s 300.7] Possibility of survival of deceased.—
The Supreme Court has observed that a chance of miraculous survival is not
contemplated by section 300. The attacker becomes liable if he knew that his victim
would die as a result of the injuries caused by him. The doctor's opinion that the victim
could have survived if timely and proper medical aid was provided is a hypothetical
proposition.55.
[s 300.8] Clause 3.—'With the intention of causing bodily injury to any person ...
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death'.—
The distinction between this clause and clause 2 of section 299 depends upon the
degree of probability of death from the act committed. If from the intentional act of
injury committed the probability of death resulting is high, the finding will be that the
accused intended to cause death, or injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death; if there was probability in a less degree of death ensuing from the act
committed, the finding will be that the accused intended to cause injury likely to cause
death.56. In the case of Mangesh v State of Maharashtra,57. the Supreme Court stated
the circumstances from which it may be gathered as to whether there was intention to
cause death. It included circumstances like nature of the weapon; on what part of the
body the blow was given; the amount of force; was it a result of a sudden fight or
quarrel; whether the incident occurred by chance or was pre-meditated; prior animosity;
grave and sudden provocation; heat of passion; did the accused take any undue
advantage; did he act cruelly; number of blows given, etc. Even if none of the injuries by
itself was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, cumulatively such
injuries may be sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.58.
[s 300.9] "Bodily injury".—
The expression "bodily injury" in clause thirdly includes also its plural, so that the clause
would cover a case where all the injuries intentionally caused by the accused are
cumulatively sufficient to cause the death in the ordinary course of nature, even if none
of those injuries individually measures up to such sufficiency. The sufficiency spoken of
in this clause, as already noticed, is the high probability of death in the ordinary course
of nature, and if such sufficiency exists and death is caused and the injury causing it is
intentional, the case would fall under clause thirdly of section 300. All the conditions
which are a prerequisite for the applicability of this clause have been established and
the offence committed by the accused, in the instant case was "murder".59.
What is required for the prosecution to prove to bring the case under clause thirdly to
section 300? First, it must be established, quite objectively, that a bodily injury is
present; Second, the nature of the injury must be proved and these are purely objective
investigations; third, it must be proved that there was an intention to inflict that
particular bodily injury, that is to say, that it was not accidental or unintentional, or that
some other kind of injury was intended; and once these three elements are proved to
be present, the enquiry proceeds further; and fourth, it must be proved that the injury of
the type just described made up of the three elements set out above is sufficient to
cause death in the ordinary course of nature. This part of the enquiry is purely objective
and inferential and has nothing to do with the intention of the offender. Once these four
elements are established by the prosecution (and, of course, the burden is on the
prosecution throughout) the offence is murder under section 300 "thirdly". Once the
intention to cause the bodily injury actually found to be present is proved, the rest of the
enquiry is purely objective and the only question is whether, as a matter of purely
objective inference, the injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
death.60. On this particular point, there is the following pertinent observation of the
Supreme Court:61.
The nature of the offence does not depend merely on the location of the injury caused by
the accused. The intention of the person causing the injury has to be gathered from a
careful examination of the facts and circumstances of each given case….
The Supreme Court also observed that the intention to cause the requisite type of injury
is a subjective inquiry, but that once that type of intention is found in the assailant, the
further inquiry whether the injury was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death is of objective nature.62.
[s 300.10] Principle of exclusion.—
In Rampal Singh v State of UP,63. after referring to the pronouncements in Rayavarapu
Punnayya (supra), Vineet Kumar Chauhan v State of UP,64. Ajit Singh v State of Punjab,65.
and Mohinder Pal Jolly v State of Punjab,66. the Supreme Court opined thus:
The evidence led by the parties with reference to all these circumstances greatly helps the
Court in coming to a final conclusion as to under which penal provision of the Code the
accused is liable to be punished. This can also be decided from another point of view i.e. by
applying the "principle of exclusion". This principle could be applied while taking recourse to
a two- stage process of determination. First, the Court may record a preliminary finding if
the accused had committed an offence punishable under the substantive provisions of s.
302 of the Code, that is, "culpable homicide amounting to murder". Then second, it may
proceed to examine if the case fell in any of the Exceptions detailed in s. 300 of the Code.
This would doubly ensure that the conclusion arrived at by the Court is correct on facts and
sustainable in law. We are stating such a proposition to indicate that such a determination
would better serve the ends of criminal justice delivery.67.
The third clause of section 300 views the matter from a general standpoint. Here, the
emphasis is on the sufficiency of the injury in the ordinary course of nature to cause
death. The sufficiency is the high probability of death in the ordinary way of nature.
When this sufficiency exists and death follows and the causing of such injury is
intended, the offence is murder. Sometimes the nature of the weapon used, sometimes
the part of the body on which the injury is caused and sometimes both are relevant.68.
In some cases, the sufficiency of injury to cause death in the ordinary course of nature
must be proved and cannot be inferred from the fact that death has in fact taken place.
In such a case, it may not be open to argue backwards from the death to the blow, to
hold that the sufficiency is established because death did result. As death can take
place from other causes, the sufficiency is required to be proved by other and separate
evidence.69.
[s 300.11] Contradiction between ocular and medical evidence.—
Where there is a contradiction between medical evidence and ocular evidence, the
position of law can be crystallised to the effect that though the ocular testimony of a
witness has greater evidentiary value vis-à-vis medical evidence, when medical
evidence makes the ocular testimony improbable, that becomes a relevant factor in the
process of the evaluation of evidence. However, where the medical evidence goes so
far that it completely rules out all possibility of the ocular evidence being true, the
ocular evidence may be disbelieved.70. The opinion given by a medical witness need
not be the last word on the subject. Such opinion shall be tested by the Court. If the
opinion is bereft of logic or objectivity, Court is not obliged to go by that opinion. After
all, opinion is what is formed in the mind of a person regarding a fact situation. If one
doctor forms one opinion and another doctor forms a different opinion on the same
facts, it is open to the judge to adopt the view which is more objective or probable.
Similarly, if the opinion given by one doctor is not consistent with probability, the Court
has no liability to go by that opinion merely because it is said by the doctor. Of course,
due weight must be given to opinions given by persons who are experts in the
particular subject.71. Where the testimony of eye-witnesses is totally inconsistent with
medical evidence, and suffering from improvements, the rule that ocular evidence has
precedence over medical evidence cannot be applied.72.
[s 300.12] Discrepancy between the reports of doctor who examined the
deceased and the doctor who conducted autopsy.—
Where the medical certificate showed the age of injuries as 24 hours but in post-
mortem report it was mentioned as six hours, it was held that in post-mortem report,
the determination of precise duration of the injuries can be possible due to the internal
examination of the injuries whereas no such advantage is available to the doctor when
he examines the injuries in the nature of contusions.73.
[s 300.13] Medical Evidence.—
Medical evidence that the death was homicidal, cannot alone be made the basis to
connect the accused person with crime. The accused persons are entitled to the
benefit of doubt.74.
[s 300.14] "Secondly" and "Thirdly" distinguished.—
The two clauses are disjunctive and separate. Clause "Secondly" is subjective to the
offender. It must, of course, first be found that bodily injury was caused and the nature
of the injury must be established, that is to say, whether the injury is on the leg or the
arm or the stomach, how deep it penetrated, whether any vital organs were cut and so
forth. These are purely objective facts and leave no room for inference or deduction: to
that extent the enquiry is objective; but when it comes to the question of intention, that
is subjective to the offender and it must be proved that he had an intention to cause the
bodily injury that is found to be present. First part of clause "Thirdly" envisages
infliction of bodily injury with the intention to inflict it, i.e., it must be proved that the
injury found to be present was the injury that was intended to be inflicted. Whether it
was sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature is a matter of inference
or deduction from the proven facts about the nature of the injury and has nothing to do
with the question of intention.75.
[s 300.15] Clause 4.—'Person committing the act knows that it is so imminently
dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as
is likely to cause death'.—
Where it is clear that the act by which the death is caused is so imminently dangerous
that the accused must be presumed to have known that it would, in all probability,
cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, then unless he can meet
this presumption his offence will be culpable homicide, and it would be murder unless
he can bring it under one of the Exceptions.76. Thus, a man who strikes at the back of
another a violent blow with a formidable weapon77. or who strikes another in the throat
with a knife78. must be taken to know that he is doing an act imminently dangerous to
the life of the person at whom he strikes and that a probable result of his act will be to
cause that person's death.79.
This clause also provides for that class of cases where the acts resulting in death are
calculated to put the lives of many persons in jeopardy without being aimed at any one
in particular, and are perpetrated with a full consciousness of the probable
consequences, e.g., where death is caused by firing a loaded gun into a crowd [vide
Illustration (d)], or by poisoning a well from which people are accustomed to draw
water.
The Supreme Court has held that although this clause is usually invoked in those cases
where there is no intention to cause the death of any particular person, the clause may
on its terms be used in those cases where there is such callousness towards the result
and the risk taken is such that it may be stated that the person knows that the act is
likely to cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.80.
Where it was shown that the spurious liquor was sold from the local vends belonging to
the accused persons coupled with the fact that after the tragedy struck, the accused
persons even tried to destroy remaining bottles, it was held that the accused had full
knowledge of the fact that the bottles contained substance methyl and also about the
disastrous consequences thereof, thus bringing their case within the four corners of
section 300 fourthly.81.
[s 300.16] As to dying declarations.—
In spite of all the importance attached and the sanctity given to the piece of dying
declaration, Courts have to be very careful while analysing the truthfulness and,
genuineness of the dying declaration and should come to a proper conclusion that the
dying declaration is not a product of prompting or tutoring.82.
[s 300.16.1] Benefit of doubt.—
An accused person cannot be given the benefit of doubt only on the ground that
injuries on his person were not explained particularly when the injuries are of simple
and superficial nature.83.
[s 300.16.2] Death in custody.—
In State of TN v Balkrishna,84. it was held that merely because the death of the person
occurred in police custody, an immediate inference of murder could not be drawn
against the police.
[s 300.17] Non-explanation of injuries.—
The omission on the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries on the person of the
accused assumes much greater importance where the evidence consists of interested
or inimical witnesses or where the defence gives a version which competes in
probability with that of the prosecution one. However, there may be cases where the
non-explanatiosn of the injuries by the prosecution may not affect the prosecution
case. This principle would apply to cases where the injuries sustained by the accused
are minor and superficial or where the evidence is so clear and cogent, that it
outweighs the effect of the omission on the part of the prosecution to explain the
injuries.85.
[s 300.18] Exception 1.—Provocation.—
Anger is a passion to which good and bad men are both subject, and mere human
frailty and infirmity ought not to be punished equally with ferocity or other evil feelings.
The act must be done whilst the person doing it is deprived of self-control by grave and
sudden provocation. That is, it must be done under the immediate impulse of
provocation.86.
[s 300.19] Meaning of the words "grave" and "sudden".—
The expression 'grave' indicates that provocation be of such a nature so as to give
cause for alarm to the accused. 'Sudden' means an action which must be quick and
unexpected so far as to provoke the accused. The question of whether provocation
was grave and sudden is a question of fact and not one of law. Each case is to be
considered according to its own facts.87.
The mode of resentment should bear some proper and reasonable relationship to the
sort of provocation that has been given. The test to be applied is that of the effect of
the provocation on a reasonable man, so that an unusually excitable or pugnacious
individual is not entitled to rely on provocation which would not have led an ordinary
person to act as he did. It is important to consider whether a sufficient interval has
elapsed since the provocation to allow a reasonable person time to cool, and account
must be taken of the instrument with which the homicide had been effected.88. The
mode of resentment must bear a reasonable relationship to the provocation.89.
Principles relating to "grave and sudden provocation" summarised by the Supreme Court
(1) The test of "grave and sudden" provocation is whether a reasonable man, belonging
to the same class of society as the accused, placed in the situation in which the
accused was placed would be so provoked as to lose his self-control. (2) In India,
words and gestures may also, under certain circumstances, cause grave and sudden
provocation to an accused so as to bring his act within the First Exception to section
300 of the Indian Penal Code.
(3) The mental background created by the previous act of the victim may be taken into
consideration in ascertaining whether the subsequent act caused grave and sudden
provocation for committing the offence.
(4) The fatal blow should be clearly traced to the influence of passion arising from that
provocation and not after the passion had cooled down by lapse of time, or otherwise
giving room and scope for premeditation and calculation.
KM Nanavati v State of Maharashtra.90.
An offence resulting from grave and sudden provocation would normally mean that a
person placed in such circumstances could lose self-control but only temporarily and
that too, in proximity to the time of provocation. The provocation could be an act or
series of acts done by the deceased to the accused resulting in inflicting of injury.91.
The test of "grave and sudden" provocation is whether a reasonable man, belonging to
the same class of society as the accused, placed in the situation in which the accused
was placed would be so provoked as to lose his self-control. Words and gestures may
also, under certain circumstances, cause grave and sudden provocation to an accused
so as to bring his act within the Exception. The mental background created by the
previous act of the victim may be taken into consideration in ascertaining whether the
subsequent act caused grave and sudden provocation for committing the offence. The
fatal blow should be clearly traced to the influence of passion arising from that
provocation and not after the passion had cooled down by lapse of time, or otherwise
giving room and scope for premeditation and calculation.92.
[s 300.20] Self-control.—
This term as it appears in section 300, Exception 1 is a subjective phenomenon and
can be inferred from the surrounding circumstances in a given case. In order to find out
whether the last act of provocation on which the offender caused the death was
sufficiently grave to deprive the accused of the power of self-control, the previous acts
of provocation caused by the person can always be taken into consideration.93.
[s 300.21] Grave and Sudden: Cases.—
Where there is sufficient time for cooling down, there would be no sudden provocation
and the act of the accused would be a deliberate one. Thus, where the accused after
receiving the provocation in a school committee meeting went to his house, brought a
gun and thereafter shot chasing fleeing men, his action did not fall within this exception
but was an act of murder.94.
What is critical for a case to fall under Exception 1 to section 300, IPC, 1860 is that the
provocation must not only be grave but sudden as well. It is only where the following
ingredients of Exception 1 are satisfied that an accused can claim mitigation of the
offence committed by him from murder to culpable homicide not amounting to murder:
(1) The deceased must have given provocation to the accused.
(2) The provocation so given must have been grave.
(3) The provocation given by the deceased must have been sudden.
(4) The offender by reason of such grave and sudden provocation must have been
deprived of his power of self-control; and
(5) The offender must have killed the deceased or any other person by mistake or
accident during the continuance of the deprivation of the power of self-control.95.
[s 300.22] Doctrine of, and acts amounting to, sustained provocation.—
What Exception 1 of section 300 contemplates is a grave and sudden provocation
whereas the ingredient of sustained provocation is a series of acts more or less grave
spread over a certain period of time, the last of which acting as the last straw breaking
a camel's back may even be a very trifling one. Where the accused had killed an
innocent woman and an infant of a family merely on the suspicion of illicit intimacy
between his wife and the father of the deceased infant and his suspicion appeared to
be more imaginary than real, it was held that there was practically no ground to invoke
this doctrine. Besides, as there was nothing to support his suspicion and there was no
enmity between the accused and the deceased either, the plea of sustained
provocation was not tenable under section 300, Exception 1.96.
[s 300.23] Adulterous intercourse.—
A man in love with a woman who had repulsed his suit might be so angry as to lose
control of himself at the sight of her engaged in sexual intercourse with another, but if
he kills one or both of them, he cannot plead grave provocation in mitigation of his
offence. The law that, when a husband discovers his wife in the act of adultery and
thereupon kills her, he is guilty of manslaughter and not murder, has no application
where the woman concerned is not the wife of the accused.97.
[s 300.24] CASES.—
Adulterous intercourse has been held, in several cases, to give grave and sudden
provocation.98. It is not necessary for the husband to plead seeing of actual
intercourse between his wife and the paramour.99. Where the accused killed the
deceased as he saw the deceased committing sodomy on his son, the case
undoubtedly fell within this Exception and he was liable to be convicted only under
section 304, Part II and not under section 302, IPC, 1860.100.
However, if the death of the adulterer is caused not in a fit of passion but with
subsequent deliberation, this Exception does not apply.
[s 300.25] Quarrel.—
Where two friends happened to quarrel suddenly and one inflicted a single knife injury
to the other which was not aimed at any vital part and the doctor verified that the injury
should not have ordinarily caused death, he was punished under section 304, Part
II.101.
[s 300.26] Exception 2.—Exceeding right of private defence.—
This Exception provides for the case of a person who exceeds the right of private
defence. The authors of the Code observed:
Wherever the limits of the right of private defence may be placed, and with whatever degree
of accuracy they may be marked, we are inclined to think that it will always be expedient to
make a separation between murder and... voluntary culpable homicide in defence.
The chief reason for making this separation is that the law itself invites men to the very
verge of the crime which we have designated as voluntary culpable homicide in defence. It
prohibits such homicide indeed; but it authorizes acts which lie very near to such homicide;
and this circumstance, we think, greatly mitigates the guilt of such homicide.
That a man who deliberately kills another in order to prevent that other from pulling his nose
should be allowed to go absolutely unpunished would be most dangerous. The law
punishes and ought to punish such killing; but we cannot think that the law ought to punish
such killing as murder; for the law itself has encouraged the slayer to inflict on the assailant
any harm short of death which may be necessary for the purpose of repelling the outrage; to
give the assailant a cut with a knife across the fingers which may render his right hand
useless to him for life, or to hurl him downstairs with such force as to break his leg; and it
seems difficult to conceive that circumstances which would be a full justification of any
violence short of homicide should not be a mitigation of the guilt of homicide. That a man
should be merely exercising a right by fracturing the skull and knocking out the eye of an
assailant, and should be guilty of the highest crime in the Code if he kills the same assailant;
that there should be only a single step between perfect innocence and murder, between
perfect impunity and liability to capital punishment, seems unreasonable. In a case in which
the law itself empowers an individual to inflict any harm short of death, it ought hardly, we
think, to visit him with the highest punishment if he inflicts death.102.
[s 300.27] When the offender is not entitled to get the benefit of this exception.
—
A fortiori in cases where an accused sets up right of private defence, the first and the
foremost question that would fall for determination by the Court would be whether the
accused had the right of private defence in the situation in which death or other harm
was caused by him. If the answer to that question is in the negative, Exception 2 to
section 300 of the Code would be of no assistance. Exception 2 presupposes that the
offender had the right of private defence of person or property but he had exceeded
such right by causing death. It is only in case answer to the first question is in the
affirmative, viz., that the offender had the right of defence of person or property, that
the next question, viz., whether he had exercised that right in good faith and without
premeditation and without any intention of doing more harm that was necessary for the
purpose of such defence would arise. Should answer to any one of these questions be
in the negative, the offender will not be entitled to the benefit of Exception 2 to section
300 of the Code. 103.
[s 300.28] CASES.—No right of private defence.—
Where both sides can be convicted for their individual acts and normally no right of
private defence is available to either party and they will be guilty of their respective
acts.104. There was no premeditation and the act was committed in a heat of passion
and the appellant had not taken any undue advantage or acted in a cruel manner. There
was a fight between the parties. The case falls under the fourth exception to section
300, IPC, 1860.105. The accused were, in fact, aggressors and being members of the
aggressors' party none of the accused can claim right of self-defence.106. Merely
because there was a quarrel and some of the accused persons sustained injuries, that
does not confer a right of private defence extending to the extent of causing death. It
has to be established that the accused persons were under such grave apprehension
about the safety of their life and property that retaliation to the extent done was
absolutely necessary. Right of private defence has been rightly discarded.107. After an
altercation and exchange of abuses, two persons aimed rifles at each other. After one
of them had lowered his rifle, the other fired at him killing him. It was held that the
accused was not entitled to the right of private defence and was convicted under
section 300.108.
[s 300.29] Exceeding Right of Private Defence.—
While exercising his right of private defence of property, the accused exceeded his right
of private defence and killed a man. It was held that the case fell within Exception 2 of
section 300 and as such he was liable to be punished under section 304, Part I and not
under section 302, IPC, 1860.109. To ward off an attack with a stick, a stab wound
puncturing the heart is not justified. It is a clear case of offence under section 304, Part
I, IPC, 1860.110. So also is the case of killing an unarmed trespasser with chhura blows
which punctured both the heart and the lung.111.
A dispute over lease of agricultural land led to murder. The accused appeared armed
with deadly weapons. Two persons were killed in separate incidents. The Court said
that this indicated that there was pre-meditation. The acts done showed that there was
intention to do more harm than was necessary for the purposes of self-defence. Hence,
the offences were not in the category of culpable homicide not amounting to
murder.112.
The Court found that at some point of time, the accused (appellant) was exercising his
right of private defence, but that had ceased to exist long before the time when the
deadly blow was administered. His conviction was altered to section 304, Part I.113.
[s 300.30] Causing injury after private defence ceased to be available.—
There was a scuffle between the accused persons and the complainant party. One of
the accused persons fired a gunshot of which one member of the complainant party
died. The injury was caused when members of the complainant party were fleeing
away. There was the right of private defence before the retreat. Thus, he exceeded the
right of private defence. The Court said that his act was covered by Exception 2 to
section 300. He was liable to be punished under section 304, Part II.114.
[s 300.31] Exception 3.—Public servant exceeding his power.—
This Exception protects a public servant, or a person aiding a public servant acting for
the advancement of public justice, if either of them exceeds the powers given to them
by law and causes death. It gives protection so long as the public servant acts in good
faith, but if his act is illegal and unauthorised by law, or if he glaringly exceeds the
powers entrusted to him by law, the Exception will not protect him. Where death was
caused by a constable under orders of a superior, it being found that neither he nor his
superior believed that it was necessary for public security to disperse certain reapers
by firing on them, it was held that he was guilty of murder since he was "not protected
in that he obeyed the orders of his superior officer."115. Exception 3 to section 300, IPC,
1860 pre-supposes that a public servant who causes death must do so in good faith
and in due discharge of his duty as a public servant and without ill-will towards the
person whose death is caused. The positive case set up by the defence that firing was
in self-defence has been rejected by the trial court, High Court as well by the Supreme
Court, the question of any good faith does not arise. The appellants had fired without
provocation at the car killing two innocent persons and injuring one. The obligation to
prove an exception is on the preponderance of probabilities but it nevertheless lies on
the defence.116.
[s 300.32] Exception 4.—Death caused in sudden fight.—
A perusal of the provision would reveal that four conditions must be satisfied to bring
the matter within Exception 4:
(i) it was a sudden fight;
(ii) there was no premeditation;
(iii) the act was done in the heat of passion; and that
(iv) the assailant had not taken any undue advantage or acted in a cruel manner.117.
[s 300.33] "Fight": meaning of.—
The 'fight' occurring in Exception 4 to section 300, IPC, 1860 is not defined in IPC, 1860.
It takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that there must be no time for the
passions to cool down and in this case, the parties have worked themselves into a fury
on account of the verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a combat between two
and more persons whether with or without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any
general rule as to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a question of fact
and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must necessarily depend upon the proved facts
of each case.118.
The language of Exception 4 to section 300 is, thus, clear that culpable homicide is not
murder if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion
upon a sudden quarrel provided the offender has not taken undue advantage or acted
in a cruel or unusual manner. In order to bring a case under Exception (4) to section
300, IPC, 1860, the evidence must show that the accused without any premeditation
and in a heat of passion and without having undue advantage had not acted in cruel
manner. Every one of these circumstances is required to be proved to attract Exception
(4) to section 300, IPC, 1860 and it is not sufficient to prove only some of them. None
of the ingredients have been proved in evidence to bring the case under Exception (4)
to section 300, IPC, 1860.119. Case comes under Exception 4 where the prosecution
evidence sufficiently suggested that a scuffle had taken place on the dingy where the
appellant and his companions were trying to recover the dingy while the deceased was
preventing them from doing so, and in the course of this sudden fight and in the heat of
passion, the appellant assaulted the deceased and pushed him in the sea eventually
resulting in his death.120. Where there was no pre-meditation and the act was
committed in a heat of passion and the appellant had not taken any undue advantage
or acted in a cruel manner and there was a fight between the parties, the Supreme
Court found that the case falls under the fourth exception to section 300, IPC, 1860 and
the conviction altered from section 302, IPC, 1860 to section 304, Part I, IPC, 1860.121.
Heat of passion requires that there must be no time for the passions to cool down and
in this case the parties have worked themselves into a fury on account of the verbal
altercation in the beginning.122.
This Exception was held not to apply to a case where two bodies of men, for the most
part armed with deadly weapons, deliberately entered into an unlawful fight, each being
prepared to cause the death of the other, and aware that his own might follow, but
determined to do his best in self-defence, and in the course of the struggle death
ensued.123. An unpremeditated assault (in which death is caused) committed in the
heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel comes within the Exception.124.
Exception 4 is attracted only when there is a fight or quarrel which requires mutual
provocation and blows by both sides in which the offender does not take undue
advantage.125.
A "sudden fight" implies mutual provocation and blows on each side. The homicide
committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral provocation, nor could in such
cases the whole blame be placed on one side. For if it were so, the Exception more
appropriately applicable would be Exception 1.126.
The word 'fight' conveys something more than a verbal quarrel.127. It takes two to make
a fight. It is not necessary that weapons should be used in a fight. In order to constitute
fight, it is necessary that blows should be exchanged even if they do not all find their
target.128. The fight must be with the person who is killed and not with another
person.129. The words "undue advantage" in this Exception means "unfair
advantage".130. Where a wordy quarrel had taken place and the quarrel had led to the
use of weapons by both the parties against each other, the Supreme Court said that it
could not be held to be a kind of case in which the accused had deliberately attacked
the deceased with an intention to kill them. It is a case which would fall under the
Exception 4 to section 300, IPC, 1860.131. Where on account of a sudden impulse and
without any intention or knowledge of the impending consequences, the accused
squeezed the testicles of the other causing shock, cardiac arrest and instant death, the
Supreme Court held that the offence in question amounted to grievous hurt punishable
under section 325 and not under this section.132. Where two cultivating parties working
in their respective fields picked up a sudden quarrel over the dividing line and death
ensued, there was no previous ill-will between them and, therefore, no pre-meditation,
conviction was altered from under section 302 to one under section 304, Part I read
with section 34.133. Where, on the other hand, the incident did take place at the spur of
the moment and evidence showed that the accused persons intentionally assaulted the
deceased and his family in a brutal manner, their conviction under section 300 was held
to be proper.134. The accused persons cannot argue successfully that the incident
occurred at the spur of the moment where they came to the place of occurrence armed
with deadly weapons. In this case, the evidence established that it was a pre-meditated
act, thus their conviction for the offence punishable under section 302, IPC, 1860 was
held proper.135. In a sudden fight in heat of passion and without pre-meditation the
accused armed with deadly weapon inflicted fatal blows on the unarmed deceased
even when he fell on the ground. It was held that Exception 4 of section 300 was not
attracted and the conviction of the accused for murder was proper.136.
Where the offender took an undue advantage or acted in a cruel and unusual manner, it
was held that the benefit of Exception 4 could not be given to him. The Supreme Court
observed that the weapon used or the manner of attack is out of all proportion, that
fact must be taken into consideration for deciding whether undue advantage was
taken.137.
A person opened the door on the call of his uncle who was under assault. He was
unarmed and came out to see what was happening. He received a gunshot at his chest
causing death. The Court said that the appellant had taken undue advantage of his
position at the time. He could not claim the benefit of Exception 4.138.
Where though there was a sudden quarrel between the accused and the deceased,
there was absolutely no fight between the two as there was no exchange of blows, nor
any attack from the side of the deceased who was totally unarmed but nevertheless
the accused attacked the deceased with an axe causing his death, it was held that his
case did not fall either within Exception 4 or Exception 2 and he was squarely liable
under section 302, IPC, 1860.139. A sudden fight developed between the accused and
the deceased while the former was telling the latter that he should not carry his cattle
by the side of the field of the accused. Three brothers of the accused rushed to his
rescue and belaboured the deceased with whatever weapons they had in their hands.
The deceased died of multiple injuries and broken bones. The ferocious cruelty
established intention to cause death and took the case out of the exception.140.
The accused abused a road sweeper who happened to throw mud on him. The father
of the sweeper slapped the accused. The infuriated accused went away and came back
with others. He alone, however, inflicted the fatal blow. The occurrence was of sudden
origin because the gap between the injury and quarrel was that of only a few minutes.
There was no previous enmity and blows were not repeated as the deceased fell down
helpless. There was no unusual cruelty. The benefit of Exception 4 was allowed.141. In
a quarrel between the accused and his father, the accused attacked his father with a
dagger causing death and also attacked the intervener who were his stepmother and
sisters. No injury was caused to the accused because all others were unarmed. The
accused took undue advantage of that fact. He acted in a cruel manner. The exception
was not attracted. He was guilty of murder.142. It cannot be said in all cases of a single
blow that section 302 would not be attracted. A single blow in some cases may entail
conviction under section 302 in some cases or under section 304 and in some cases
under section 326. Acting on this principle in a case where the victim was invited to a
particular place and there three associates of the accused caught hold of him and the
accused delivered a single knife blow on the chest, about which it could not be said
that it was not inflicted without premeditation, the Court said that it could not be said
that the accused had not taken undue advantage. Exception 4 was not attracted.143.
Where the accused, who had gone along with the deceased and others, picked up a
quarrel with the deceased, entered his house, and came back with a knife and gave
blows to the deceased and others who tried to stop them and then ran away, it was
held that Exception 4 to section 300 was not applicable. Conviction under section 302
was proper.144. A quarrel took place between a son and his father just outside the son's
house. The son dragged the father into the Courtyard. His other sons came out to his
rescue. The son retreated into the room, bolted it from inside and shot at them from the
window. One of his brothers received a bullet at his chest and died. The plea of self-
defence was not accepted. His father and brothers were the eye-witnesses who were
naturally there for saving the skin of their father. The accused shot at them from the
bolted security of his room.145.
A previous quarrel triggered off because of sarcastic remarks made during the
occasion of a marriage. Three accused started shooting with their respective guns at
unarmed victims from close range on vital parts of their bodies. The victims had merely
indulged in verbal duel with them. The accused acted in cruel and unusual manner.
Conviction for the offence of murder was held to be proper, Exception 4 being not
applicable.146.
[s 300.34] Comparison of Exception 1 (provocation) with Exception 4 (sudden
fight).—
Exception 4 of section 300, IPC, 1860 covers acts done in a sudden fight. The said
exception deals with a case of prosecution not covered by the first exception, after
which its place would have been more appropriate. The exception is founded upon the
same principle, for in both there is absence of premeditation. But, while in the case of
Exception 1, there is total deprivation of self-control, in the case of Exception 4, there is
only that heat of passion which clouds men's sober reason and urges them to deeds
which they would not otherwise do. There is provocation in Exception 4 as in Exception
1; but the injury done is not the direct consequence of that provocation. In fact,
Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding that a blow may have been
struck, or some provocation given in the origin of the dispute or in whatever way the
quarrel may have originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties puts them in
respect of guilt upon equal footing. A 'sudden fight' implies mutual provocation and
blows on each side. The homicide committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral
provocation, nor in such cases could the whole blame be placed on one side. For if it
were so, the Exception more appropriately applicable would be Exception 1. There is no
previous deliberation or determination to fight. A fight suddenly takes place, for which
both parties are more or less to be blamed. It may be that one of them starts it, but if
the other had not aggravated it by his own conduct, it would not have taken the serious
turn it did. There is then mutual provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to
apportion the share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The help of Exception 4
can be invoked if death is caused (a) without premeditation; (b) in a sudden fight; (c)
without the offender's having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner; and (d) the fight must have been with the person killed. To bring a case within
Exception 4, all the ingredients mentioned in it must be found. It is to be noted that the
'fight' occurring in Exception 4 to section 300, IPC, 1860 is not defined in the IPC, 1860.
It takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that there must be no time for the
passions to cool down and in this case, the parties have worked themselves into a fury
on account of the verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a combat between two
and more persons whether with or without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any
general rule as to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a question of fact
and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must necessarily depend upon the proved facts
of each case. For the application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient to show that there
was a sudden quarrel and there was no premeditation. It must further be shown that
the offender has not taken undue advantage or acted in cruel or unusual manner. The
expression 'undue advantage' as used in the provision means 'unfair advantage'.147. In
both cases, there is absence of premeditation. But in Exception 1 there is total
deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception there is such heat of passion as clouds
sober reason and urges the man to do something which he would not otherwise do. A
sudden fight implies mutual provocation and blows on each side. The homicide in such
a case is not traceable to unilateral provocation. In such cases, the whole blame cannot
be attributed to one side. It may be that a fight was initiated by one side but without
aggravating provocation from the other side it might not have taken the serious turn. A
situation of mutual provocation and aggravation develops making it difficult to
apportion the blame between the two sides.148.
[s 300.35] Exception 5.—Death caused of the person consenting to it.—
The following reasons are given for not punishing homicide by consent so severely as
murder:
In the first place, the motives which prompt men to the commission of this offence are
generally far more respectable than those which prompt men to the commission of murder.
Sometimes it is the effect of a strong sense of religious duty, sometimes of a strong sense
of honour, not unfrequently of humanity. The soldier who, at the entreaty of a wounded
comrade, puts that comrade out of pain, the friend who supplies laudanum to a person
suffering the torment of a lingering disease, the freed man who in ancient times held out the
sword that his master might fall on it, the highborn native of India who stabs the females of
his family at their own entreaty in order to save them from the licentiousness of a band of
marauders, would, except in Christian societies, scarcely be thought culpable, and even in
Christian societies would not be regarded by the public, and ought not to be treated by the
law, as assassins.149.
This exception abrogates the rule of English law that a combatant in a fair duel who
kills his opponent is guilty of murder. Under this Exception, the person who is killed in a
duel "suffers or takes the risk of death by his own choice." In applying the Exception, it
should first be considered with reference to the act consented to or authorised, and
next with reference to the person or persons authorised, and as to each of those some
degree of particularity at least should appear upon the facts proved before the
Exception can be said to apply. It must be found that the person killed with a full
knowledge of the facts, determined to suffer death, or take the risk of death; and that
this determination continued up to and existed at the moment of his death.150. The
consent must have been given unconditionally and without any pre-reservation.151.
The case supposed in the illustration to Exception 5 is one of the offences expressly
made punishable by section 305.
[s 300.36] Death caused by voluntary act of deceased resulting from fear of
violence.—
If a man creates in another man's mind an immediate sense of danger which causes
such person to try to escape, and in so doing he injures himself, the person who
creates such a state of mind is responsible for the injuries which result.152. If, for
instance, four or five persons were to stand round a man, and so threaten him and
frighten him as to make him believe that his life was in danger, and he were to back
away from them and tumble over a precipice to avoid them, their act would amount to
murder.153.
[s 300.37] Discovery of body of murdered person not necessary/Absence of
corpus delicti.—
It is well-settled law that in a murder case, to substantiate the case of the prosecution,
it is not required that dead bodies must have been made available for the identification
and discovery of dead body is not sine qua non for applicability of section 299 of IPC,
1860.154. The mere fact that the body of a murdered person has not been found is not
a ground for refusing to convict the accused of murder. But when the body is not
forthcoming, the strongest possible evidence as to the fact of the murder should be
insisted on before conviction.155. Such evidence could come from the testimony of
eye-witnesses or from circumstantial evidence or from both.156. If the prosecution is
successful in providing cogent and satisfactory proof of the victim having met a
homicidal death, absence of corpus delicti will not by itself be fatal to a charge of
murder.157.
[s 300.38] Ascertainment of time of death.—
Judging the time of death from the contents of the stomach may not always be the
determinative test. It will require due corroboration from other evidence.158.
[s 300.39] Single eye-witness, corroboration needed.—
A child witness (aged 13 years at the time of incident) deposed categorically about the
gruesome incident he had witnessed. The Supreme Court held that in such situation, it
is considered a safe rule of prudence to generally geneally look for corroboration of the
sworn testimony of the witness in Court, as to the identity of the accused, who are
strangers to them, in the form of earlier identification proceeding.159.
[s 300.40] Acquittal of co-accused, effect.—
Allegation was that the accused along with the juvenile attacked the deceased. Eye
witness deposed that the juvenile was not involved. Acquittal of the juvenile has no
effect on the case of others.160. Benefit of acquittal of co-accused cannot be given to
the main accused.161.
[s 300.41] Non-production of FIR book.—
The incident involved assault on villagers and causing of multiple deaths. The injured
witness gave written complaint in the hospital duly signed by him. The complaint was
immediately sent to the police station. On its basis, a printed FIR was registered and a
copy sent to the magistrate. These circumstances completely ruled out the suggestion
that the FIR was bogus or doctored. Non-production of the book was due to non-
availability. This cannot by itself, invite suspicious glance from the Court or be a ground
for throwing out the prosecution case.162.
[s 300.41.1] Ante timed.—
The lodging of a First Information Report within 20 minutes of the incident, on the oral
dictation at the police station which was four furlongs from the place of incident
creates some doubt about the actual time of lodging of the FIR.163.
[s 300.42] Delay in FIR.—
Whether the delay is so long as to draw a cloud of suspicion on the prosecution case
will depend upon a variety of factors, which will vary from case to case.164. Where the
occurrence took place in the late night in a remote village and the sufferers of the
incident were the widow and her two minor children, apart from the fact that the police
station was one and a half kilometres away, the delay in registering FIR on the next day
is proper.165.
[s 300.43] Strange behaviour of the complainant.—
Where the incident of murder occurred inside the forest, while some friends of the
complainant were participating in a party and the informant/eye-witness instead of
going to the police station went to the house of an Advocate. The Supreme Court found
that it appeared to be a very strange behaviour on the part of the complainant and so
many of his friends who were with him to go to an Advocate, that too 15 kms away,
rather than approaching the Police Station to report the matter.166.
[s 300.44] Motive.—
It is fairly well settled that while motive does not have a major role to play in cases
based on eye-witness account of the incident, it assumes importance in cases that rest
entirely on circumstantial evidence.167. Where other circumstances lead to the only
hypothesis that the accused has committed the offence, the Court cannot acquit the
accused of the offence merely because the motive for committing the offence has not
been established in the case.168. If depositions giving the eye-witness account of
incident that led to death of deceased are reliable, absence of a motive would make
little difference.169. When there is an eye-witness account on record, the absence of
motive pales into insignificance.170.
[s 300.45] Last seen together.—
It is trite law that a conviction cannot be recorded against the accused merely on the
ground that the accused was last seen with the deceased.171. There may however be
cases where, on account of close proximity of place and time between the event of the
accused having been last seen with the deceased and the factum of death, a rational
mind may be persuaded to reach an irresistible conclusion that either the accused
should explain how and in what circumstances the victim suffered the death or should
own the liability for the homicide.172. But in Arabindra Mukherjee v State of WB,173.,174.
it was held that once the accused was last seen with the deceased, the onus is upon
him to show that either he was not involved in the occurrence at all or that he had left
the deceased at her home or at any other reasonable place. To rebut the evidence of
last seen and its consequences in law, the onus was upon the accused to lead
evidence in order to prove his innocence. In C Perumal v Rajasekaran,175.,176. there was
a time lag of two days in last seen together of A2– A5 with the deceased and Court
found it difficult to connect them with the incident. Where the accused was last seen
together with the deceased by his wife, but the prosecution could not establish the
cause of death, the accused was not convicted based on the last seen theory.177.
The circumstance of last seen together does not by itself and necessarily lead to the
inference that it was the accused who committed the crime. There must be something
more establishing the connectivity between the accused and the crime. Mere non-
explanation on the part of the accused by itself, cannot lead to proof of guilt against
the appellant.178. Where it was found that the deceased was in the company of the
accused prior to one week of the post-mortem of the deceased and it was also found
through the post-mortem that the murder was about one week ago, the Court held that
the last seen theory applies.179.
Where there was a clear gap of 51 hours and 45 minutes between the time when the
victim was last seen in the company of the accused and the time of his death, it was
held that this time gap was too wide to act upon the last seen theory.180.
[s 300.45.1] Co-accused.—
Merely because two persons have been acquitted that benefit cannot be extended to
others in view of the direct evidence establishing their presence and participation in the
crime.181.
[s 300.46] Plea of alibi.—
While weighing the plea of 'alibi', the same has to be weighed against the positive
evidence led by the prosecution.182.
31. Santosh v State, 1975 Cr LJ 602 : AIR 1975 SC 654 [LNIND 1975 SC 50] ; See also Sehaj
Ram, 1983 Cr LJ 993 (SC) : AIR 1983 SC 614 [LNIND 1983 SC 90] : (1983) 3 SCC 280 [LNIND
1983 SC 90] . There should be causal connection between death and injury, not proved where
death ensued 13 days after the alleged injury by the deceased woman's husband, Imran Khan v
State of MP, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 17 (MP).
32. Govinda, (1876) 1 Bom 342; Shankar Narayan Bhadolkar v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2004 SC
1966 [LNIND 2004 SC 1370] : 2004 Cr LJ 1778 , distinguish between culpable homicide and
murder restated, nature of mens rea required in two provisions also explained.
33. State of AP v R Punnayya, 1977 Cr LJ 1 : AIR 1977 SC 45 [LNIND 1976 SC 331] ; Kalaguru
Padma Rao v State of AP, (2007) 12 SCC 48 [LNIND 2007 SC 179] : AIR 2007 SC 1299 [LNIND
2007 SC 179] , distinction between sections 299 and 300 restated. Sunder Lal v State of
Rajasthan, (2007) 10 SCC 371 [LNIND 2007 SC 599] ; Abbas Ali v State of Rajasthan, (2007) 2
SCC 129 : AIR 2007 SC 1239 [LNIND 2007 SC 165] : 2007 Cr LJ 1667 , distinction restated.
34. Laxminath v State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2009 SC 1383 [LNIND 2009 SC 58] : (2009) 3 SCC
519 [LNIND 2009 SC 58] ; Budhi Lal v State of Uttarakhand, AIR 2009 SC 87 [LNIND 2008 SC
1928] : (2008) 14 SCC 647 [LNIND 2008 SC 1928] ; Abdul Waheed Khan Waheed v State of
Andhra Pradesh, JT 2002 (6) SC 274 [LNIND 2002 SC 530] ; Augustine Saldanha v State of
Karnataka, 2003 (10) SCC 472 [LNIND 2003 SC 709] ; Thangaiya v State of TN, 2005 (9) SCC 650
[LNIND 2004 SC 1221] and Sunder Lal v State of Rajasthan, 2007 (10) SCC 371 [LNIND 2007 SC
599] .
35. Ajit Singh v State of Punjab, (2011) 9 SCC 462 [LNIND 2011 SC 844] .
36. Rampal Singh v State of UP, 2012 Cr LJ 3765 : (2012) 8 SCC 289 [LNIND 2012 SC 425] .
37. State of Orissa v Raja Parida, 1972 Cr LJ 193 199 (Ori). Gurmej Singh v State of Punjab, AIR
1992 SC 214 [LNIND 1991 SC 301] : 1992 Cr LJ 293 : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 75 , discussing how
evidence in criminal cases is to be appreciated. Other cases giving guidelines for appreciation
of evidence for purposes of section 300 are State of UP v Ram Chandra, 1992 Cr LJ 418 All
(doubtful evidence); Anokh Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 598 : 1992 Cr LJ 525 : 1992
Supp (1) SCC 426 (improbable evidence, delay in lodging FIR); State of Karnataka v Venkatesh,
AIR 1992 SC 674 : 1992 Cr LJ 707 (prosecution witness not inspiring confidence). See also
Sakharam v State of MP, AIR 1992 SC 758 [LNIND 1992 SC 157] : 1992 Cr LJ 861 , a boy of 16–
17 years of age lived alone with the deceased woman in a single-room house some eight days
before the incident, woman killed by gun-shot injuries, the boy acquitted because there was no
other evidence than that of living together; Peddireddy Subbareddi v State of AP, 1991 Cr LJ 1391
: AIR 1991 SC 1356 , gap of 15 hours in lodging FIR, the sole eye-witness not telling the fact to
any of the villagers. Acquittal on benefit of doubt. Gangotri Singh v State of UP, AIR 1992 SC 948
: 1992 Cr LJ 1290 , where the dying declaration was clear in reference, but did not even mention
the names of the other accused with whom the deceased was on enmity, conviction of the
named accused alone was held to be proper.
Acquittals.—Varun Chaudhary v State of Rajasthan, 2011 Cr LJ 675 : AIR 2011 SC 72 [LNIND
2010 SC 1067] : (2011) 12 SCC 545 [LNIND 2010 SC 1067] ; the recovered knife was never
produced before the court and was never shown to the accused; scanty evidence; conviction set
aside; State Through CBI v Mahender Singh Dahiya, (2011) 3 SCC 109 [LNIND 2011 SC 114] : AIR
2011 SC 1017 [LNIND 2011 SC 114] : 2011 Cr LJ 2177 , circumstances relied on do not connect
the accused, accused acquitted. Allarakha K Mansuri v State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 SC 1051
[LNIND 2002 SC 119] , defective investigation should not be made a ground of acquittal by itself.
The setting aside of acquittal by the High Court was held to be proper. Chander Pal v State of
Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 989 [LNIND 2002 SC 105] , acquittal because of unsatisfactory evidence,
State of Haryana v Ram Singh, AIR 2002 SC 620 [LNIND 2002 SC 32] , largely on matters of
evidence, such as gap between medical and eye-witness account, relative witness not to be
rejected for that reason alone, defence witnesses are entitled to equal treatment with those of
the prosecution. Panchdeo Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 526 [LNIND 2001 SC 3070] ,
acquittal because of unreliable dying declaration. Surendra Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC
260 [LNIND 2001 SC 2701] , firing at the inmates of a car, one killed, one injured. The injured eye-
witness identified the assailant at the test identification parade but had stated at the stage of
the FIR that could not recognise him. Conviction of the accused was set aside. Thanedar Singh v
State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 175 [LNIND 2001 SC 2451] , killing at night, no moonlight, no
identification of killers, High Court not justified in reversing acquittal. RV Chacko v State of
Kerala, AIR 2001 SC 537 [LNIND 2000 SC 1797] , acquittal because no proper proof. Durbal v
State of UP, (2011) 2 SCC 676 [LNIND 2011 SC 100] : AIR 2011 SC 795 [LNIND 2011 SC 100] :
2011 Cr LJ 1106 ; presence of eyewitness doubtful, acquitted; Prahlad Singh v State of MP, 2011
(8) Scale 105 [LNIND 2011 SC 1086] : 2011 Cr LJ 4366 , possibility that these three accused
roped in on account of animosity cannot be ruled out and given them the benefit of doubt on
that score. Surendra Pratap Chauhan v Ram Naik, AIR 2001 SC 164 [LNIND 2000 SC 1521] : 2001
Cr LJ 98 , murder in village groupism real killers could not be identified and other failures of
proof, acquittal, Jagdish v State of MP, AIR 2000 SC 2059 [LNIND 2000 SC 842] : 2000 Cr LJ
2955 , acquittal of one accused because of uncertainty in technical as well as general evidence,
conviction of the other because of the case proved against him.
Shaikh Umar Ahmed Shaikh v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1998 SC 1922 [LNIND 1998 SC 498] :
1998 Cr LJ 2534 , strong possibility of the accused being shown to the witnesses before
identification in court, conviction set aside because the identification was the basis of the
conviction. Bhola Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1999 SC 767 [LNIND 1998 SC 1050] : 1999 Cr LJ
1132 , acquittal because the presence of the witnesses on the spot became doubtful, their
testimony seemed to have been tailored in accordance with the post-mortem report. Delayed
test identification parade. Accused acquitted: State of Maharashtra v Syed Umar Sayed Abbas,
2016 Cr LJ 1445 : 2016 (3) SCJ 77 . Vijayan v State of Kerala, AIR 1999 SC 1086 [LNIND 1999 SC
159] : 1999 Cr LJ 1638 , acquittal, because photographs were published and, therefore,
identification evidence became useless and dying declaration was also unreliable. Mohd. Zahid
v State of TN, AIR 1999 SC 2416 [LNIND 1999 SC 593] : 1999 Cr LJ 2699 , acquittal because eye-
witnesses and the doctor both found to be not reliable. Hargovandas Devrajbhai Patel v State of
Gujarat, AIR 1998 SC 370 [LNIND 1997 SC 1443] : 1998 Cr LJ 662 (SC), no proof that the police
officer caused death of the deceased in police custody. Acquittal Omwati v Mahendra Singh, AIR
1998 SC 249 [LNIND 1997 SC 91] , 250 : 1998 Cr LJ 401 , acquittal because no proper
investigation and evidence. Daljit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1999 SC 324 : 1999 Cr LJ 454 ,
acquittal because of false witnesses. Din Dayal v Raj Kumar, AIR 1999 SC 537 : 1999 Cr LJ 487 ,
accused acquitted because witnesses not truthful. Tanviben Pankaj Kumar Divetia v State of
Gujarat, AIR 1997 SC 2193 [LNIND 1997 SC 803] : 1997 Cr LJ 2535 , no evidence to lead to
irresistible conclusion about complicity of the accused in causing murder, conviction on
surmises and conjectures set aside. Mohd Aman v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2960 : 1997
Cr LJ 3567 , not proper handling of finger-print evidence, conviction not proper. Shahbad Pall
Reddy v State of AP, AIR 1997 SC 3087 [LNIND 1997 SC 1096] : 1997 Cr LJ 3753 , murder alleged
to be by 26 persons, no proper investigation, acquittal. Harkirat Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1997
SC 3231 [LNIND 1997 SC 988] : 1997 Cr LJ 3954 , material contradictions in statements of
witnesses, other irregularities, acquittal. Sahib Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 1997 SC 3247
[LNIND 1997 SC 1005] : 1997 Cr LJ 3956 , delayed FIR, highly interested witnesses, confession
not truthful, conviction liable to be set aside. State of UP v Bhagwan, AIR 1997 SC 3292 : (1997)
11 SCC 19 , acquittal because of unreliable eye-witnesses. B Subba Rao v Public Prosecutor, AIR
1997 SC 3427 [LNIND 1997 SC 1065] : 1997 Cr LJ 4072 , because the source of light through
which identification was possible not proved Rambilas v State of MP, AIR 1997 SC 3954 [LNIND
1997 SC 1302] : 1997 Cr LJ 4649 , a notorious person murdered on the day of a festival and
body thrown into a tank, eye-witnesses not likely because of the festival, that is why were not
real there could be other possible killers, acquittal. Paramjit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1997 SC
1614 [LNIND 1996 SC 2101] : (1997) 4 SCC 156 [LNIND 1996 SC 2101] , two types of evidence,
last seen together and dying declaration, both found not reliable. Acquittal, Jaspal Singh v State
of Punjab, AIR 1997 SC 332 [LNIND 1996 SC 1648] : 1997 Cr LJ 370 , confession and
identification evidence week, acquittal. Devinder v State of Haryana, AIR 1997 Sc 454 [LNIND
1996 SC 1460] : 1996 Cr LJ 4461 , acquittal because of benefit of doubt. Chander Pal v State of
Haryana, 2002 Cr LJ 1481 (SC), quarrel in the course of playing game of ludo, murder, no proper
evidence, acquittal. Bijoy Singh v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 2623 : AIR 2002 SC 1949 [LNIND
2002 SC 300] , prosecution for murder and attempt to murder, 12 persons were convicted, but
there was no proper investigation, acquittal. State of AP v Kowthalam Chinna Narasimhulu, 2001
Cr LJ 722 (SC), political rivalry, murder, unreliable witnesses, acquittal. State of MP v Surpa, 2001
Cr LJ 3290 (SC), contradictions in evidence, wife of the victim not disclosing the incident to any
one till the next day, acquittal.
Kanhai Mishra v State of Bihar, 2001 Cr LJ 1258 (SC), rape and murder, acquittal, Dhanjibhai v
State of Gujarat, 2001 Cr LJ 1587 (Guj), another case of being killed by burns, but no proof of
involvement of the accused husband. Sohan v State of Haryana, 2001 Cr LJ 1707 (SC), only
interested witness examined, no independent witness examined though available, conviction set
aside. State of Rajasthan v Teja Singh, 2001 Cr LJ 1176 (SC), no corroboration of evidence of
interested eye-witness, acquittal proper. Kalyan v State of UP, 2001 Cr LJ 4677 (SC), acquittal
because of poor state of evidence. State of Delhi, 2001 Cr LJ 61 (Del) acquittal from the charge
of raping and killing one's daughter poor evidence. Sudama Pandey v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ
582 (SC), acquittal because of no proper evidence. Gurucharan v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 4560
(All), accused persons alleged to have entered a bus, fired at passengers and used knives, death
of two caused, acquitted under benefit of doubt. Ajab Singh v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 1809 :
(2000) 3 SCC 521 [LNIND 2000 SC 2011] , order by Supreme Court of investigation by CBI.
Chhannoo Lal v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 2787 (All), killing of wife and children, but prosecution
could prove nothing, husband acquitted. Referring Officer v Tiringhly, 2000 Cr LJ 2569 (AP),
murder of a priest of a temple, and throwing away the body into a pond. The court found it to be
a case of no evidence. Conviction of the accused and sentence of death set aside. State of
Punjab v Kulwant Singh, 2000 Cr LJ 2692 (P&H), triple murder, accused acquitted because of
prosecution failures. Dinesh v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 3474 : 2002 Cr LJ 2970 (SC),
acquittal because of inconsistent evidence and weapons not produced. Mahabir Singh v State of
Haryana, 2001 Cr LJ 3945 (SC), sole eye-witness contradicting himself acquittal. State of
Rajasthan v Chhote Lal, 2012 AIR (SCW) 1159 : 2012 Cr LJ 1214 , sole eye witness turned hostile,
acquittal confirmed; Javed Masood v State of Rajasthan, AIR 2010 SC 979 [LNIND 2010 SC 214] :
(2010) 3 SCC 538 [LNIND 2010 SC 214] : (2010) 3 SCR 236 [LNIND 2010 SC 214] : 2010 Cr LJ
2020 , presence of eye witness doubtful, conviction set aside. Jiten Besra v State of WB, AIR
2010 SC 1294 [LNIND 2010 SC 224] : (2010) 3 SCC 675 [LNIND 2010 SC 224] : 2010 Cr LJ 2032 ,
all the alleged incriminating circumstances could not be said to have been established; accused
is entitled to benefit of doubt. Gajula Surya Prakasarao v State of AP, (2010) 1 SCC 88 [LNIND
2009 SC 1973] : 2010 Cr LJ 2102 : AIR 2010 SC (Supp) 181, eye witness did not name the
accused in the statement, accused acquitted; Jaipal v State, 1998 Cr LJ 4085 : AIR 1998 SC
2787 [LNIND 1999 PNH 698] , murder, persons accused not shown to be guilty, acquittal. State
of HP v Dhani Ram, 1997 Cr LJ 214 : 1997 SCC (Cr) 244 (SC), the only proof was that of motive,
but there was no other evidence, acquittal. Gurprit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2002 SC 2390 ,
TADA offender, murder, charged, not proved, acquittal. Nasim v State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 3329
(All), arsenic poison mixed in pulse drink, six persons lost life, but who mixed not clear, act of
persons other than cook not ruled out, acquittal. Deva v State of Rajasthan, 1999 Cr LJ 265 : AIR
1999 SC 214 [LNIND 1998 SC 1402] , murder by accused not proved, acquittal. Surinder Kumar v
State of Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 267 : AIR 1999 SC 215 [LNIND 2012 SC 879] , veterinary surgeon
killed, accused acquitted because his guilt could not be proved. Bhupinder Singh v State of
Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 396 (SC), death probably in encounter firing, constable acquitted. State of HP
v Rakesh Kumar, 1999 Cr LJ 564 (HP), acquittal. Ashok Kumar v State of Bihar, 1999 Cr LJ 599
(SC), murder of morning walker, dying declaration, not reliable, no other evidence, acquittal.
Paras Yadav v State of Bihar, 1999 Cr LJ 1122 : AIR 1999 SC 644 [LNIND 1999 SC 17] ,
participation of accused in murder not proved, acquittal. Chandregowda v State of Karnataka,
1999 Cr LJ 1719 (Kant), child sacrificed to death by throttling for the purpose of learning black
magic, doctor's certificate of schizophrenia, only evidence was admission of guilt under section
313, Cr PC, 1973. Held, conviction not possible on that basis alone. Ahmed Bin Salam v State of
AP, 1999 Cr LJ 2281 : AIR 1999 SC 1617 , conviction set aside because of failure of evidence;
State of UP v Kapildeo Singh, 1999 Cr LJ 2594 : AIR 1999 SC 1783 [LNIND 1999 SC 140] ,
accused, alleged to have entered Kutia of their victim at mid night to settle land dispute and
assaulted him with sharp instruments to death, but no proof, acquittal. Balbir Singh v State of
Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 4076 : AIR 1999 SC 3227 [LNIND 1999 SC 718] , acquittal because of no
proof. Vithal Tukaram More v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 2715 [LNIND 2002 SC 449] :
2002 Cr LJ 3546 , acquittal because of unreliable evidence. Mathura Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR
2002 SC 2707 [LNIND 2002 SC 447] : 2002 Cr LJ 3538 , glaring discrepancies in evidence of eye-
witnesses, acquittal; BL Satish v State of Karnataka, 2002 Cr LJ 3508 (SC), grandson was
charged of strangulating his grandmother to death. The only circumstance against him was his
statement that ornaments were kept in his maternal grand father's house, acquittal; Thangavelu
v State of TN, 2002 Cr LJ 3558 (SC), false evidence case demolished by medical report as to
time of death.
Pandit Ram Prakash Sharma v Khairati Lal, 1998 Cr LJ 1410 : AIR 1998 SC 2820 , unreliable
witnesses, acquittal. Prem Prakash Mundra v State of Rajasthan, 1998 Cr LJ 1620 : AIR 1998 SC
1189 [LNIND 1998 SC 133] , murder of child, accused could not be connected with it. State of
Rajasthan v Mahaveer, 1998 Cr LJ 2275 (SC), enmity between parties, but nothing could be
proved. Kochu Maitheen Kannu Salim v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 2277 (SC), conduct of eye-
witnesses did not inspire confidence, acquittal. State of Punjab v Karnail Singh, 1998 Cr LJ 2556 :
AIR 1998 SC 1936 [LNIND 1998 SC 307] , death of five persons by gun shots, no evidence as to
who caused whose death, defence version that the accused acted in self-defence was
supported by evidence, acquittal. Jaipal v State (UT of Chandigarh), 1998 Cr LJ 4085 : AIR 1998
SC 2787 [LNIND 1999 PNH 698] , considered acquittal by the trial judge, setting aside by the
High Court merely because a different view of the evidence was also possible was not proper;
Kaptan Singh v State of MP, acquittal solely on the basis of investigation, held patently wrong;
State of HP v Dhani Ram, 1997 Cr LJ 214 : AIR 1996 SCW 4055 , acquittal upheld; Roshan Singh v
State of UP, 1997 Cr LJ 256 (All), acquittal because of benefit of doubt; Darshan Singh v State of
Punjab, 1997 Cr LJ 370 : AIR 1970 SC 332 , accused not properly identified, confession of guilt
not found reliable, acquittal.
Kuldip Singh v State of Punjab, 2002 Cr LJ 3944 : AIR 2002 SC 3023 [LNIND 2002 SC 498] ,
murder of the wife and daughter of informant, but the accused could not be connected with it,
acquittal; Dhananjay Shanker Shetty v State of Maharashtra, 2002 Cr LJ 3729 (SC), circumstantial
evidence of murder by history sheeter. But no proof. The accused was arrested in injured
condition. No explanation, acquittal. Toran Singh v State of MP, 2002 Cr LJ 3732 (SC), material
contradictions and omissions in statements of witness. Muthu v State of Karnataka, 2002 Cr LJ
3782 (SC), no evidence to connect the accused with the murder, close scrutiny of evidence
disclosed hollowness of prosecution case. Accused entitled to benefit of doubt. Balu Sonba
Shinde v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 3137 [LNIND 2002 SC 552] , deposition of a witness
on whom the prosecution story hinged was found partly improbable, the evidence of hostile
witness was rather found more normal and natural. Accused entitled to benefit of doubt.
Ashish Batham v State of MP, AIR 2002 SC 3206 [LNIND 2002 SC 556] , failure in love affair
alleged to be motive for murder, acquitted because of lack of credibility in evidence. Raghunath v
State of Haryana, AIR 2003 SC 165 [LNIND 2002 SC 703] : 2003 Cr LJ 401 , group rivalry,
accused persons entered the house of their victim and caused death, but evidence doubtful, the
witnesses, while taking the injured to hospital, did not file report even when they crossed two
police stations, acquittal. Jasbir v State of Haryana, AIR 2003 SC 554 [LNIND 2002 SC 805] :
2003 Cr LJ 826 , there were lathi injuries on the person of the deceased, lathi wielding accused
were acquitted. State of Karnataka v AB Nagaraj, AIR 2003 SC 666 [LNIND 2002 SC 783] : 2003
Cr LJ 848 , allegation that the daughter was killed by her father and step-mother. Witnesses who
saw them in the national park could not be believed because they were working behind bushes.
The theory of the accused parents that they were looking for their daughter seemed to be
probable. There was no history of bad treatment, acquittal; Kantilal v State of Gujarat, AIR 2003
SC 684 [LNIND 2002 SC 789] : 2003 Cr LJ 850 , prosecution case was that the accused stole
gold ornaments of the victim woman and murdered her. The facts that he had given the
ornaments and ingot to a jeweller for melting were not established. Link in the chain of
circumstances missing, acquittal. Bhim Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2003 SC 693 [LNIND 2002
SC 793] : 2003 Cr LJ 857 , acquittal because of uncorroborated and controverted evidence. State
of UP v Arun Kumar Gupta, AIR 2003 SC 801 [LNIND 2003 SC 9] : 2003 Cr LJ 894 , except for
being indebted to the deceased, other evidence to connect the accused with the murder was
nullity, acquittal. Lallu Manjhi v State of Jharkhand, AIR 2003 SC 854 [LNIND 2003 SC 3] : 2003 Cr
LJ 914 , land dispute, but who was in possession not properly proved, interested eye-witness not
corroborated. No conviction on sole testimony. Zafar v State of UP, AIR 2003 SC 931 [LNIND
2003 SC 41] : 2003 Cr LJ 1218 , sole child witness, examined after four to five days probably
because another eye-witness had backed out. Not reliable. No conviction. Jai Pal v State of UP,
AIR 2003 SC 1012 [LNIND 2003 SC 134] : 2003 Cr LJ 1243 eye-witness in examination-in-chief
did not name the accused, in cross-examination he named him among so many others, but no
overt act attributed, delay in examining witnesses not explained, identification of dead body
doubtful, acquittal. Bhagwan Singh v State of MP, AIR 2003 SC 1088 [LNIND 2003 SC 82] : 2003
Cr LJ 1262 , mother killed by assailants, six-year-old child sleeping with her, testified that after
seeing his mother being assaulted, he went to sleep again, no TI parade held, the conduct of the
father was also unnatural, he did not enquire anything from the child before lodging the FIR,
sending civil disputes between the accused and the deceased was found to be weak cause,
acquittal. Shailendra Pratap v State of UP, AIR 2003 SC 1104 [LNIND 2003 SC 6] : 2003 Cr LJ
1270 , another case of acquittal because of weak links in evidence. Kanwarlal v State of MP,
2003 Cr LJ 82 (SC), the allegation that the victim was assaulted by several accused persons in
free fight with axes and spears. But no cut injuries except one on head, conviction of one
accused for murder not sustainable. Mohan Singh v Prem Singh, 2003 Cr LJ 11 : AIR 2003 SC
3582 , failure of evidence on all points in the trial for murder, defence version more probable,
acquittal. Nabab Khan v State of MP, 2003 Cr LJ 94 (MP), sole eye-witness, other factors of
evidence not reliable, casting doubt upon sole-witness account, acquittal. This was an attack on
the whole family. Four members were killed. The sole eye-witness who survived with injuries
was not medically examined and false explanations were submitted for the same. Jai Narain v
State of UP, 2000 Cr LJ 168 (All), evidence of homemates of the deceased contradictory, no
independent witness, motive that they were working as police informers not proved, unexplained
delay in medical examination of deceased, defence version more probable, acquittal. Narendra
Singh v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 205 (All), killing of man's wife, his son and nephew, proof against
the alleged killers not substantiated, acquittal. Moti v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 1694 : AIR 2003 SC
1897 [LNIND 2003 SC 302] , serious difference in family evidence and medical evidence,
uncertainty benefit of doubt. Suresh Chaudhary v State of Bihar, 2003 Cr LJ 1717 : AIR 2003 SC
1981 [LNIND 2003 SC 289] , presence of eye-witness at the site of three murders, time of death,
time of lodging FIR doubtful, medical evidence showing use of explosive bomb, eye-witness did
not mention it, acquittal. State of Punjab v Sucha Singh, 2003 Cr LJ 1210 : AIR 2003 SC 1471
[LNIND 2003 SC 177] , murder in revenge, eye-witness father of the deceased, but rendered no
help at rescue, his presence at the spot became doubtful, other witnesses also not reliable,
conviction set aside. Bharat v State of MP, 2003 Cr LJ 1297 (SC), circumstantial evidence, chain
not complete, murder for robbery, recovery of doubtful value, extra-judicial confession, not
reliable, acquittal. State of UP v Dharamraj, 2003 Cr LJ 1522 : AIR 2003 SC 1589 [LNIND 2003 SC
206] , eye-witnesses gave different version of the weapons used, acquittal. Rajeevan v State of
Kerala, 2003 Cr LJ 1572 : AIR 2003 SC 1813 , accusation due to political bitterness, acquittal.
Baldev Singh v State of MP, 2003 Cr LJ 880 : AIR 2003 SC 2098 [LNIND 2003 SC 2] , improbability
of murder by accused, acquittal. Sambhunath v State of WB, 2003 Cr LJ 975 (Cal), conviction set
aside because the chain of circumstances was not complete. Shankar Singh v State of UP, 2003
Cr LJ 1095 (All), killed with gunshot injury, delay in lodging FIR, conduct of eye-witnesses
unnatural, acquittal. State of UP v Krishna Pal, 2003 Cr LJ 1115 (All), a man and his son killed,
evidence of his wife and daughter found to be self-contradictory, acquittal. Suresh B Nair v State
of Kerala, 2003 Cr LJ 1152 (Ker), the accused killed his victim with a piece of stone, the eye-
witness did not know him before, identification parade not held, the identification by the
witnesses was not corroborated, acquittal. Raghunath v State of Haryana, 2003 Cr LJ 401 (SC),
failure of the prosecution case. Ganga Singh v State of UP, 2003 Cr LJ 653 (All), failure of
prosecution to connect points. Brijpal Singh v State of MP, AIR 2003 SC 2460 [LNIND 2003 SC
485] , confusion caused by witnesses as to killing by gunshots, ballistic opinion contradicted
eye-witnesses, benefit of doubt. State of UP v Dharamraj, AIR 2003 SC 1589 [LNIND 2003 SC
206] , witnesses spoke of different instruments of murder, FIR ante-timed, acquittal. Moti v State
of UP, AIR 2003 SC 1897 [LNIND 2003 SC 302] , time of occurrence of murder, post-mortem
report as to state of food in the stomach contradicted by the statements of family members as
to time of food intake, time of killing became uncertain and resulted in acquittal. State of MP v
Mishrilal, 2003 Cr LJ 2312 (SC), the prosecution suppressed the true genesis of the incident, in
fact the prosecution party were the aggressors, they did not explain anything about injuries
received by three accused persons, one of whom was seriously injured, every detail of the
prosecution case was found to be doubtful. Acquittal of accused persons. Khima Vikamshi v
State of Gujarat, 2003 Cr LJ 2025 (SC), allegation that the accused killed the deceased in the
presence of his pardanashin daughter in law, which was itself a doubtful fact and her
statements were also not reliable, there were no blood stains on her clothes, acquittal. Sadhu
Ram v State of Rajasthan, 2003 Cr LJ 2331 (SC), death of woman alongwith her eight-month-old
daughter, two versions possible, accidental burning or intentionally set on fire, witness not clear,
no reliance on such witness, acquittal. State of UP v Bhagwani, 2003 Cr LJ 2337 (SC), blood-
stained earth not collected, independent witnesses not called, doubt about place of happening,
acquittal.
Appeal against acquittal.—Acquittal on the charge of murder of child because of denial of
inheritance, conviction by High Court, upheld by Supreme Court; Swami Prasad v State of MP,
(2007) 13 SCC 25 [LNIND 2007 SC 293] ; Shaik China Brahmam v State of AP, (2007) 14 SCC 457
[LNIND 2007 SC 1388] : AIR 2008 SC 610 [LNIND 2007 SC 1388] , acquittal by the trial court
reversed by the High Court, conviction by High Court upheld by Supreme Court; Malleshappa v
State of Karnataka, (2007) 13 SCC 399 [LNIND 2007 SC 1112] : AIR 2008 SC 69 [LNIND 2007 SC
1112] , conviction found to be unsustainable in the circumstances of the case; Sunny Kapoor v
State (UT of Chandigarh), 2006 Cr LJ 2920 (SC), circumstantial evidence with glaring
discrepancies, conviction not upheld.
Convictions.—State of Punjab v Jugraj Singh, AIR 2002 SC 1083 [LNIND 2002 SC 118] , acquittal
set aside, minor irregularities in evidence not to be over weighed. Prakash Dhawal Khairnar v
State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 340 [LNIND 2001 SC 2841] , the accused wiped out his
brother with family in order to prevent partition, the confessional statement of his son who had
seen multiple murders, alongwith other circumstances, established guilt, conviction. Rama
Mangaruji Chacherkar v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 283 [LNIND 2001 SC 2771] , dispute
between brothers over distribution of agricultural produce, death of the brother caused by
hurling a hand grenade at him. The wife of the deceased testified that she did not see throwing
of bomb but her evidence showed that she had seen the whole incident. Conviction not
interfered with. Brij Lal v State of Haryana, (2002) SC 291 : 2002 Cr LJ 581 , minor difference in
the eye-witness version and medical evidence as to in which part of the head the bullet struck,
conviction maintained. Meharban Singh v State of MP, AIR 2002 MP 299 : 2002 Cr LJ 586 (SC)
villagers taking injured in bullock cart to hospital, death on the way, the injured person before his
death told them about his assailant, reliable, conviction, no interference. Majid v State of
Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 382 [LNIND 2001 SC 2827] , minor son of the deceased found to be
natural and reliable witness, conviction upheld. Sewaka v State of MP, AIR 2002 MP 50 : 2002 Cr
LJ 205 , murder of husband, wife grappled with killers but they escaped, moonlight
identification, conviction maintained. Majju v State of MP, AIR 2001 SC 2930 [LNIND 2001 SC
2409] : 2001 Cr LJ 4762 , eye-witness account of the way in which the accused gave farsa (axe)
blows to the deceased found to be wholly trustworthy, post-mortem report that there were no
incised wounds was not allowed to overthrow the genuine eye-witness account. Conviction
maintained. Harisingh M Vasava v State of Gujarat, 2002 Cr LJ 1771 (SC), another case of
conviction because of good evidence. Rajesh v State of Gujarat, 2002 Cr LJ 1821 (SC),
conviction on the strength of technical evidence finger prints expert. Ram Kumar Laharia v State
of MP, AIR 2001 SC 556 [LNIND 2001 SC 76] : 2001 Cr LJ 712 , 11-year-old boy put into touch
with live electric wire and then threw into water alongwith the wire, conviction for murder.
Sambasivan v State of Kerala, AIR 1998 SC 2107 [LNIND 1998 SC 556] : 1998 Cr LJ 2924 , rival
trade unionists, one of them threw bombs on the members of the other, evidence of the
members of the victim union acceptable, conviction. Umesh Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 2000 SC
2111 [LNIND 2000 SC 871] : 2000 Cr LJ 6167 , the accused tried to take away paddy from the
thrashing floor. On resistance, came out with lathi blows and gun shots, killing one person,
convicted for murder. Swaran Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2000 SC 2017 [LNIND 2000 SC 734] :
2000 Cr LJ 2780 , enmity between the accused and deceased, eye-witnesses, conviction.
Paramjit v State of Haryana, AIR 2000 SC 2038 [LNIND 2000 SC 878] : 2000 Cr LJ 2966 , both the
accused and deceased were armed with double barrel guns, yet it could not be said that the
accused was acting in self-defence, conviction. Manjeet Singh v State (NCT) of Delhi, AIR 2000
SC 1062 [LNIND 2000 SC 305] : 2000 Cr LJ 1439 , murder, natural family witnesses, conviction.
SN Dube v NB Bhoir, AIR 2000 SC 776 [LNIND 2000 SC 73] : 2000 Cr LJ 830 , conviction under
section 300 read with sections 120 and 149, eye-witnesses reliable. State of Karnataka v R
Yarappa Reddy, AIR 2000 SC 185 [LNIND 1999 SC 894] : 2000 Cr LJ 400 , conviction because of
clear evidence. In reference to the evidence of eye-witnesses, the court said that criminal courts
should not expect set reaction from eye-witnesses who see an incident like murder. State of
Maharashtra v Manohar, AIR 1998 SC 166 : 1998 Cr LJ 335 , re-appreciation of evidence,
acquittal of the accused by the High Court set-aside. Surendra Narain v State of UP, AIR 1998 SC
192 [LNIND 1997 SC 1689] : 1998 Cr LJ 359 (SC), a person shot to death while on rickshaw, co-
sitter on the rickshaw, witness, reliable, conviction, rickshaw puller not examined, not material,
evidence has to be weighed, not counted. Proof of motive is not necessary when the accused
being guilty is amply proved by evidence. Another ruling to the same effect, State of UP v Nahar
Singh, AIR 1998 SC 1328 [LNIND 1998 SC 215] : 1998 Cr LJ 2006 , motive proved in reference to
the main accused, also identification evidence and dying declaration, convicted, others
acquitted. Jinnat Mia v State of Assam, AIR 1998 SC 533 [LNIND 1997 SC 1618] : 1998 Cr LJ 851
, killing a man while in bed, his wife being also injured. Her testimony led to conviction. Jagdish v
State of Haryana, AIR 1998 Sc 732 : 1998 Cr LJ 1099 , shooting down with gun, conviction, no
interference called for. Atmendra v State of Karnataka, AIR 1998 SC 1985 [LNIND 1998 SC 386] :
1998 Cr LJ 2838 , killing by intentional shooting not accidental. Ram Gopal v State of Rajasthan,
AIR 1998 SC 2598 : 1998 Cr LJ 4066 , death by gunshot injury before home inmates, who being
natural witnesses, conviction.
Ram Khilari v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1999 SC 1002 [LNIND 1999 SC 1347] : 1999 Cr LJ 1450 ,
conviction possible on the basis of a confession. Bhaskaran v State of Kerala, AIR 1998 Sc 476
[LNIND 1997 SC 1562] : 1998 Cr LJ 684 , death caused by stabbing, conviction because of
reliable witnesses. Bharat Singh v State of UP, AIR 1999 SC 717 [LNIND 1998 SC 1112] : 1999 Cr
LJ 829 , accused convicted on the evidence of eye-witnesses, it was immaterial that the
personal body guards of the deceased were not examined. Daleep Singh v State of UP, AIR 1997
SC 2245 : 1997 Cr LJ 2760 , evidence of eye-witnesses supported by FIR and also by medical
evidence, conviction proper, Baitullah v State of UP, AIR 1997 SC 3946 [LNIND 1997 SC 1322] :
1997 Cr LJ 4644 , outspoken murder, proof of motive not necessary. State of Gujarat v
Anirudhsingh, AIR 1997 SC 2780 [LNIND 1997 SCDRCHYD 22] : 1997 Cr LJ 3397 , flag-hoisting
ceremony, hitting the deceased from behind with unlicenced firearm, conviction for murder,
Kailash v State of UP, AIR 1997 SC 2835 [LNIND 1997 SC 1686] : 1997 Cr LJ 3511 , conviction for
murder of three members of family, reliable witnesses. Dalip Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1997
SC 2985 [LNIND 1997 SC 882] : 1997 Cr LJ 3647 , presence of eye-witnesses, not doubtful,
supported by medical evidence, defence version found false, conviction. Baleshwar Mandal v
State of Bihar, AIR 1997 SC 3471 [LNIND 1997 SC 1067] : 1997 Cr LJ 4084 , conviction because
of reliable eye-witnesses, inspite of irregularities by investigating officer. Nikka Singh v State of
Punjab, AIR 1997 SC 3676 [LNIND 1996 SC 1644] : 1977 Cr LJ 4651 , conviction confirmed,
reliable child eye-witness. Sanjeev Kumar v State of Punjab, AIR 1997 SC 3717 [LNIND 1997 SC
811] : 1997 Cr LJ 3178 , reliable prosecution witnesses, conviction. Shabir Mohmad Syed v State
of Maharashtra, AIR 1997 SC 3808 [LNIND 1997 SC 820] : 1997 Cr LJ 4416 , one of the accused
persons could not be identified and, therefore, acquitted, others convicted.
Murarilal Jivram Sharma v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1997 SC 1593 : 1997 Cr LJ 782 , death
caused with country made pistol, proved by medical, technical and eye-witness account,
conviction. Balbir Singh v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 1704 [LNIND 1997 SC 51] : 1997 Cr LJ
1179 , death caused by inflicting injuries, evidence of approver corroborated by prosecution
witnesses, conviction. Nathuni Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 1997 SC 1808 : (1998) 9 SCC 238 ,
though moonless night, but witnesses identified the assailants because they were known
persons, conviction.
Kanta Ramudu v State of AP, AIR 1997 SC 2428 [LNINDORD 1997 SC 122] : 1997 SCC (Cr) 573,
causing death by piercing sharp-edged weapon into the heart of the deceased, the accused
declaring his intention to do away with him. Rohtas v State of UP, AIR 1997 SC 2444 [LNIND
1997 SC 772] : 1997 Cr LJ 2981 , accused persons came with a determination to kill their
victims and they did kill them with spears, convicted. Mithilesh Upadhyay v State of Bihar, AIR
1997 SC 2457 [LNIND 1997 SC 714] : 1997 SCC (Cr) 716, eye-witness account that each of the
three accused fired at their victim and each shot hit him, not to be disregarded for the fact that
only bullet wounds were found, one shot could have missed the target, conviction. Manmohan
Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1997 Sc 1773 : 1997 Cr LJ 1632 , concurrent finding of guilt by the
trial court and High Court. No interference by the Supreme Court. Bhartu v State of Haryana, AIR
1997 SC 281 [LNIND 1996 SC 1727] : 1997 Cr LJ 242 , conviction for murder. Navakoti Veera
Raghavalu v State of AP, AIR 1997 SC 727 [LNIND 1997 SC 61] : 1997 Cr LJ 841 , disabled son
killed by father by setting him on fire, clear dying declaration, motive to grab property gifted to
him by grandfather.
Raghbir Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2000 SC 3395 [LNIND 2000 SC 678] : 2000 Cr LJ 2463 ,
gunshot injury gave risk to complications of intervening discussion, conviction for murder,
enhancement of fine from Rs. 2,000 to Rs. 10,000 was set aside because there was no apparent
justification for the enhancement. Geeta v State of Karnataka, AIR 2000 SC 3475 [LNIND 1999
SC 1091] : 2000 Cr LJ 3187 , killer of a lady guest found guilty of murder and theft of ornaments.
Kothakulava Naga Subba Reddy v Public Prosecutor, AP High Court, AIR 2000 SC 3480 [LNIND
2000 SC 523] : 2000 Cr LJ 3452 , a relative who had come from another village, testified to the
assault on the deceased. His testimony became the basis of conviction. Lal Ji Singh v State of
UP, AIR 2000 SC 3594 , the accused party indiscriminately fired and assaulted the prosecutor,
killing four, dying declaration of woman deceased, relied upon to convict. Ajay Singh v State of
Bihar, AIR 2000 SC 3538 [LNIND 2000 SC 757] , two motor cycle borne persons shot at the
deceased with their respective weapons, testimony of two eye-witnesses which was
unimpeachable was relied upon for conviction, irrespective of the fact that one pistol was
examined by ballistic expert or that medical evidence was different from the eye-witness
account. Dharmendra Singh v State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 SC 1937 [LNIND 2002 SC 302] (Supp) :
2002 Cr LJ 2631 (SC), the accused fatally assaulted his two sons after sending his wife away
but she returned home and witnessed the incident. Conviction for murder confirmed. Sukhdev
Yadav v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 80 (SC), no interference in conviction. Munna v State of
Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 4127 (Raj), murder by hitting and running over by station wagon. State of
TN v Kutty, 2001 Cr LJ 4169 (SC), killer of two women for whom he worked, all the details of the
incident captured, conviction. Firozuddin Basheeruddin v State of Kerala, 2001 Cr LJ 4215 (SC),
conspiracy and murder, conviction. Nelabothu v State of AP, 2001 Cr LJ 509 , murder by accused
proved no interference in conviction. Gura Singh v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 487 (SC), the
killer of his father, sufficiently connected by evidence, conviction. State (NCT) of Delhi v Sunil,
2001 Cr LJ 604 (SC), medical report of death by bruises all over the body, murder, conviction.
Suryanarayana v State of Karnataka, 2001 Cr LJ 705 (SC), murder witnessed by child, trustworthy,
conviction sustained. Vijay Pal Singh v State (NCT) of Delhi, 2001 Cr LJ 3294 (SC) murder, eye-
witnesses, acquittal not to be set aside. Gade Lakshmi Mangraju v State of AP, 2001 Cr LJ 3317
(SC), complete chain of events formed by circumstances, conviction. Bibhachha v State of
Orissa, 2001 Cr LJ 2895 (SC) : 1998 Cr LJ 1553 (Ori), connection of the accused with murder
proved. Sandeep v State of Haryana, 2001 Cr LJ 1456 : AIR 2001 SC 1103 [LNIND 2001 SC 552] ,
recoveries, reports and witnesses showed the accused to be the culprit, conviction.
Pradeep Kumar v State of HP, 2001 Cr LJ 1517 (HP), causing death of the victim woman by
throwing kerosene and setting her on fire. Dhananjaya Reddy v State of Karnataka, 2001 Cr LJ
1712 (SC), killing husband with the help of paramour, wife given benefit of doubt, paramour
convicted. Munshi Prasad v State of Bihar, 2001 Cr LJ 4708 (SC), the fact of 400 to 500 yards
away from the place of occurrence, not a good alibi. One could come back after causing death.
Manish Dixit v State of Rajasthan, 2001 Cr LJ 133 (SC), conviction for abduction and murder of a
jeweler. Surendra Singh Rautela v State of Bihar, 2002 Cr LJ 555 (SC), firing at inmates of a car,
one killed, another injured, identification of the assailants by the injured person could not be
discussed only because still another inmate in the car did not support the prosecution case.
Rama Mangaruji v State of Maharashtra, 2002 Cr LJ 573 (SC), accused threw crude bomb on his
brother, murder, and not coming under section 304.
State of UP v Babu Ram, 2000 Cr LJ 2457 : AIR 2000 SC 1735 [LNIND 2000 SC 647] , the accused
caused death of his father, mother and brother, bodies etc. recovered at his instance, not
entitled to acquittal. Bahadur Naik v State of Bihar, 2000 Cr LJ 2466 : AIR 2000 SC 1582 [LNIND
2000 SC 884] , meditation can develop on the spot. Two accused caught hold of their victim,
another accused inflicted five to six dagger blows, conviction was not converted from murder to
culpable homicide.
Ammini v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 481 (SC), killing a woman and her two children by
administering potassium cyanide, conviction. Darshan v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 2344 ,
murderous assault, plea of self-defence found to be false, conviction. Koli Lakhmanbhai
Chanabhai v State of Gujarat, 2000 Cr LJ 408 : AIR 2000 SC 210 [LNIND 1999 SC 1023] , injuries
caused to death, conviction. Jagdish v State of MP, 2000 Cr LJ 2955 : AIR 2000 SC 2059 [LNIND
2000 SC 842] , injuries inflicted with intention to cause death, conviction. Paramjit Singh v State
of Haryana, 2000 Cr LJ 2966 : AIR 2000 Sc 2038 [LNIND 2000 SC 878] , murder with gun shots
proved, conviction. State of WB v Mir Mohd Omar, 2000 Cr LJ 4047 : AIR 2000 SC 2988 [LNIND
2000 SC 1163] , the victim abducted and killed, conviction for murder. The court said that when
abductors are not able to explain anything about the victim, the court could presume that he
must have been killed. Md Mohiruddin v State of Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 461 : AIR 1999 Sc 307
[LNIND 1998 SC 645] , incriminatory circumstances proved guilt of accused, rightly convicted.
Amrik Singh v State of Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 463 : 1998 SCC (Cr) 944, conviction for murder. State
of Rajasthan v Major Singh, 1999 Cr LJ 1631 : AIR 1999 SC 1073 [LNIND 1999 SC 168] ,
conviction for deliberate murder by several persons. Nirmal Singh v State of Haryana, 1999 Cr LJ
1836 : AIR 1999 SC 1221 [LNIND 1999 SC 1228] , earlier rape convict, killed five members of the
family of victim, conviction for murder, proper. Siddique v State of UP, 1999 Cr LJ 2521 : AIR
1999 SC 1690 [LNIND 1999 SC 416] , no interference in conviction of accused because of
proper evidence. Ram Singh v State of UP, 1999 Cr LJ 2581 : AIR 1999 Sc 1754 [LNIND 1999 SC
1260] , shooting down the victim, conviction despite conflict between ocular and medical
evidence. State of Rajasthan v Teja Ram, 1999 Cr LJ 2588 : AIR 1999 SC 1776 [LNIND 1999 SC
279] , blows to death caused with axes, which were recovered at the instance of the accused,
other evidence, conviction. Surjit Singh v State of Punjab, 1999 Cr LJ 3485 : AIR 1999 SC 2855
[LNIND 1999 SC 499] , murder by accused proved, conviction. State of UP v Hem Raj, 1999 Cr LJ
3489 : AIR 1999 Sc 2147 [LNIND 1999 SC 1254] , assault by three, eye-witnesses deposed fatal
blow only by accused, convicted, rest acquitted. State of TN v Rajendran, 1999 Cr LJ 4552 : AIR
1999 SC 3535 [LNIND 1999 SC 857] , burnt two children and their mother alive by putting their
hut on fire, conviction. Ramesh Laxman Gavli v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 4603 : AIR 1999 Sc 3759
[LNIND 1999 SC 825] , conviction not interfered with as the incident was witnessed by reliable
persons. Ramanbhai Naranbhai v State of Gujarat, 1999 Cr LJ 5013 : (2000) 1 SCC 358 [LNIND
1999 SC 1067] , killing by unlawful assembly, conviction. Rachpal Singh v State of Punjab, AIR
2002 Sc 2710 [LNIND 2002 SC 451] : 2000 Cr LJ 2710 , conviction, medical as well as ocular
evidence. Rakesh v State of UP, AIR 2002 Sc 2721 [LNIND 2002 SC 442] : 2002 Cr LJ 3551 ,
conviction, findings of Sessions Judge were described as clearly perverse and unreasonable.
Podapati v State of AP, AIR 2002 SC 2724 [LNIND 2002 SC 869] : 2002 Cr LJ 3555 , killed one's
uncle, witnessed by four persons, conviction. Gajula v State of AP, 2002 Cr LJ 3565 (SC), faction
fights among villagers, murders, conviction.
Bhupendra Singh v State of Gujarat, 1998 Cr LJ 57 : AIR 1997 SC 3790 [LNIND 1997 SC 1378] ,
police constable shooting down head constable, defence of accident not allowed, conviction.
For details, see discussion under section 80. Harcharan Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1998 Cr LJ
398 : AIR 1998 SC 244 [LNIND 1997 SC 1350] , murder of bus-conductor, witness a bus
passenger, his testimony not distrusted for the fact that he named a wrong commodity than that
which he had gone to buy. Saudagar Singh v State of Haryana, 1998 Cr LJ 62 : AIR 1998 SC 28
[LNIND 1997 SC 890] , a witness about it was proved that he was won over by the accused, no
adverse presumption was drawn against the prosecution. Conviction of the accused who fired
the shot, others acquitted. Pakkirisamy v State of TN, 1998 Cr LJ 89 : AIR 1998 SC 107 [LNIND
1997 SC 1291] , said person caused death and took away jewellery and other items,
confessions, conviction. Malkhan v State of UP, 1998 Cr LJ 96 (All), gun-shot injury leading to
peritonitis, which became cause of death, the liability of the accused not lessened by reason of
intervention of deceased. Ratnakar Dandasena v State of Orissa, 1998 Cr LJ 295 (Ori),
misunderstanding over partition of land, hitting with axe causing death of victim, conviction.
Charan Singh v State of Punjab, 1998 Cr LJ 657 (SC); Lakha Singh v State of Punjab, 1998 Cr LJ
657 (SC), death caused by gandasa blows, both accused rightly convicted. Bhaskaran v State of
Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 684 : AIR 1998 SC 476 [LNIND 1997 SC 1562] , death by stabbing, reliable
eye-witnesses, conviction. Subhash Bassi v State, 1998 Cr LJ 719 (Del), single witness reliable,
conviction. Vasant v State of Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 844 : AIR 1998 SC 699 [LNIND 1997 SC
1599] , running over by jeep, conviction for murder. Elkur Jameesu v State of AP, 1998 Cr LJ 846 :
AIR 1998 SC 1492 [LNIND 1997 SC 1513] , entry into house and stabbing a person there who
died. His son and wife saw the intruder running away, being told by the injured that the person
seen running away injured him. Conviction. Jagdish v State of Haryana, 1998 Cr LJ 1099 : AIR
1998 SC 732 , murder, accused connected with it by eye-witnesses and medical evidence,
conviction not interfered with. Bhola Turha v State of Bihar, 1998 Cr LJ 1102 : AIR 1998 SC 1515
[LNIND 1997 SC 1500] , conviction only on the basis of dying declaration, held proper. Kamlesh
Rani v State of Haryana, 1998 Cr LJ 1251 : AIR 1998 SC 1534 [LNIND 1997 SC 1645] , conviction
on the basis of dying declaration of deceased wife. Rajendra Mahton v State of Bihar, 1998 Cr LJ
1254 : AIR 1998 SC 1546 [LNIND 1997 SC 1589] , shopkeeper killed at his shop, killers identified
by home people, conviction. Mahipal v State of Rajasthan, 1998 Cr LJ 1257 : AIR 1998 SC 864
[LNIND 1998 SC 25] , recovery of instrument of murder at the instance of the accused,
conviction. Vinayak Shivajirao Pol v State of Maharashtra, 1998 Cr LJ 1558 : AIR 1998 SC 1096
[LNIND 1998 SC 96] , extra-judicial confession, recoveries also at the instance of the accused,
conviction. George v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 2034 : AIR 1988 1376, main accused convicted,
others not identified acquitted. Dharmendra Singh v State of UP, 1998 Cr LJ 2064 (SC),
conviction for multiple murders. Mukut Singh v State, 1998 Cr LJ 2084 (All), murder, two eye-
witnesses naturally at the spot, conviction. Sankara Nagarmalleswara v State of AP, 1998 Cr LJ
2270 (SC), dying declaration, eye-witnesses to murder reliable, conviction; GS Walia v State of
Punjab, 1998 Cr LJ 2524 (SC), murder with axes and lathi blows, conviction. Rewa Ram v Teja,
1998 Cr LJ 2558 : AIR 1998 SC 2883 [LNIND 1998 SC 283] , accused persons assaulted
deceased with a variety of weapons. Accused suffered about 8-10 injuries, whereas the
deceased suffered 51 injuries. No evidence to show who caused final fatal injury. Conviction
under section 326. Nachhattar Singh v State of Punjab, 1998 Cr LJ 2560 : AIR 1998 SC 2884
[LNIND 1998 SC 282] , intentional killing of a woman in her house, conviction. Velan Kutty v State
of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ : AIR 1998 SC 2888 [LNIND 1998 SC 250] , assault on victim with chopper,
conviction. State of Rajasthan v Satyanaranyan, 1998 Cr LJ 2911 : AIR 1998 SC 2060 [LNIND
1998 SC 88] , murderous attack, brother of the victim intervened, attack fell on him, death,
conviction under section 304, Part I. Govindsami v State of TN, 1998 Cr LJ 2913 : AIR 1998 SC
2889 [LNIND 1998 SC 471] , boundary dispute, five murders, recoveries, conviction. Sambasivan
v State of Kerala, 1998 Cr LJ 2924 : AIR 1998 SC 2017 , trade union rivalry, bombs thrown on rival
union members while they were relaxing, conviction. Rajendra Kumar v State of UP, 1998 Cr LJ
1293 (SC), no adverse inference against prosecution for failure to examine another witness.
Gajjan Singh v State of Punjab, 1998 Cr LJ 3609 : AIR 1998 SC 2417 [LNIND 1998 SC 508] , two
accused, both fired, one fire hitting head, the other chest, conviction of both for murder. Brijlala
Pd Sinha v State of Bihar, 1998 Cr LJ 3611 : AIR 1998 SC 2443 [LNIND 1998 SC 598] , police
party firing at a running car, killing inmates, their defence of counter-fire failed because there
were no marks on their vehicle, conviction. Death sentence reduced to life imprisonment
because no aggravating circumstances were shown than the mere fact that they were police
people. State of HP v Manohar Singh Thakur, 1998 Cr LJ 3630 : AIR 1998 SC 2941 [LNIND 1998
SC 660] , killing for greed, wife witness, conviction. National Commission for Women v State of
UP, 1998 Cr LJ 4044 : AIR 1998 SC 2726 [LNIND 1998 SC 776] , deaths in a hostility between
two neighbouring families, conviction. Adya Singh v State of Bihar, 1998 Cr LJ 4052 : AIR 1998
SC 3011 [LNIND 1998 SC 667] , evidence of eye-witnesses accepted, it seemed that the doctor
was trying to help the accused-compounder. Dule v State of MP, 1998 Cr LJ 4073 : AIR 1998 SC
2756 [LNIND 1998 SC 839] , assault on head with sword, conviction for murder. Jangeer Singh v
State of Rajasthan, 1998 Cr LJ 4087 : AIR 1998 SC 2787 [LNIND 1999 PNH 698] , intentional
murder, conviction. Uday Kumar v State of Karnataka, 1998 Cr LJ 4622 : AIR 1998 SC 3317
[LNIND 1998 SC 908] , murder of child of four years, complete chain of circumstances,
conviction. Kommu Vinja Rao v State of AP, 1998 Cr LJ 2523 : AIR 1998 SC 2856 [LNIND 1998
SC 385] , conviction for murder. Bhagirath v State of Haryana, AIR 1997 SC 234 [LNIND 1996 SC
1769] : 1997 Cr LJ 81 , statement taken by head constable for filing report, the woman died, the
statement regarded as a dying declaration. Meharban Singh v State of MP, AIR 1997 SC 1538 :
1997 Cr LJ 766 , dying declaration, recoveries, conviction. Krishan v State of Haryana, AIR 1997
SC 2598 [LNIND 1997 SC 770] : 1997 Cr LJ 3180 , killing jail inmate, conviction. Asha v State of
Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2828 [LNIND 1997 SC 844] : 1997 Cr LJ 3508 , eye-witnesses friends of
the victim, could not be discredited for that reason alone. They gave details of the assault and
the part played by each of the assailants. Shyam v State, 1997 Cr LJ 35 (Del), murder by
poisoning, possession of poison need not be proved in all cases. The accused was seen by
witnesses administering poison, inference could be drawn that he was in possession of poison.
Ramkishore Patel v State of MP, 1997 Cr LJ 207 (SC) : 1996 AIR SCW 3939, conviction upheld.
Godaharish Mishra v Kuntalal Mishra, AIR 1997 SC 286 [LNIND 1996 SC 1719] : 1997 Cr LJ 246 ,
circumstantial evidence was absolutely clinching in establishing complicity of the accused in
murder. Acquittal set aside. Suba Singh v Harbhej Singh, 1997 Cr LJ 727 : AIR 1997 SC 1487
[LNIND 1996 SC 1929] , accused formed unlawful assembly and assaulted the victim, the latter's
relatives and other eye-witnesses did not intervene to protect him. It could not be a ground for
acquittal. Finding of the High Court that because of the dark the accused could not have been
identified was held to be totally imaginary. Naresh Mohanlal Jaiswal v State of Maharashtra, 1997
Cr LJ 761 : AIR 1997 SC 1523 [LNIND 1996 SC 1658] , witnesses did not disclose for fear, the
courts below found that there was sufficient light from the lamp post. State of AP v Gangula
Satya Murthy, AIR 1997 SC 1588 [LNIND 1996 SC 2665] : 1997 Cr LJ 774 , finding of dead body,
showing homicidal death, on a cot in the accused's house. In the absence of any explanation by
the accused, an adverse presumption was drawn against him.
Mavila Thamban Nambiar v State of Kerala, AIR 1997 SC 687 [LNIND 1997 SC 24] : 1997 Cr LJ
831 , conviction. Prem v Daula, AIR 1997 SC 715 [LNIND 1997 SC 64] : 1997 Cr LJ 838 ,
conviction for murder, two accused held the victim, the third struck him dead. Lalit Kumar v
State, 1997 Cr LJ 848 (Del), prosecution evidence consistently and conclusively established guilt
of the accused. Nagoor Naifa v State of TN, 1997 Cr LJ 880 (Mad), sub-tenant set the landlord
family on fire in their room, because they had locked his room, conviction. Rataniya Bhima Bhil v
State of Gujarat, 1997 Cr LJ 891 (Guj), murder, conviction. Rabloo Das v State of WB, 1997 Cr LJ
1025 (Cal), conviction for intentional murder. Sukhadeo v State of Maharashtra, 1997 Cr LJ 1059
(Bom), prosecution not bound to explain injuries of minor nature on the person of the accused.
Conviction proper. Pyara v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1065 (Raj), intentional murder,
conviction sustained though recoveries of incriminating articles not proved. Sunil Kumar v State
of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1081 (Raj), conviction for intentional murder properly proved. State of
UP v Dan Singh, 1997 Cr LJ 1150 : AIR 1997 SC 1654 [LNIND 1997 SC 162] , murder of marriage
party of Scheduled Caste, for details see discussion under section 149. Teja Singh v State
Punjab, AIR 1997 SC 921 : 1997 Cr LJ 1175 , conviction, multiple injuries, theory of accident
ruled out. Yashin v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 869 [LNIND 1997 SC 68] : 1997 Cr LJ 1179 ,
intentional murder, properly proved. D Venkatasan v State of TN, 1997 Cr LJ 1287 (Mad),
conviction for murder. Subramaniam v State of TN, 1997 Cr LJ 1359 (Mad), conviction for murder
of wife. Shanker v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1388 (Raj), murder with gunshot, conviction,
non-recovery of empty cartridge not material. Jiya Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1423
(Raj), connection of accused with murder established. State of Rajasthan v Ali (Hanif), 1997 Cr
LJ 1529 : AIR 1997 SC 1023 [LNIND 1997 SC 35] , accused persons, variously armed, killed two
and attempted to kill another, conviction proper, two acquitted because eye-witnesses did not
say anything against them. Narain Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1562 (Raj), main
accused persons convicted, others acquitted. Baijnath v State of UP, 1997 Cr LJ 1691 (All),
conviction on the basis of dying declaration. Baijnath v State of UP, 1997 Cr LJ 1691 (All), non-
explanation of injury on deceased, not fatal. Satnamsingh v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1778
(Raj), killing by crushing under wheels of truck, conviction. Mouruddin Choudhury v State of
Assam, 1997 Cr LJ 1801 (Gau), conviction for intentional murder, Laxman v State of Karnataka,
1997 Cr LJ 1806 (Kant), conviction, not mentioning to accused the statement under section 313,
Cr PC, 1973 while recording his statement, not material because no prejudice caused. Gobind
Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1997 Cr LJ 1825 (Raj), main accused convicted, co-accused
acquitted. Balachandra v State of Karnataka, 1997 Cr LJ 1883 (Kant), murder of husband
witnessed by wife, sole witness, conviction. Som Nath v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1897 (P&H), murder by
accused proved beyond doubt, in view of clear evidence of time of incident, medical evidence of
rigor mortis, not considered for determining time. State of Haryana v Mewa Singh, 1997 Cr LJ
1906 : AIR 1997 SC 1407 , murder in protest against love affair, injuries on persons of accused
could be self-inflicted, no right of private defence. Gayadhar Naik v State of Orissa, 1997 Cr LJ
(Ori) two-three blows on head, both were in a drunken state, no undue advantage, no cruel
manner, conviction altered to section 304. Pandappa Hanumappa Hanamar v State of Karnataka,
AIR 1997 SC 3663 [LNIND 1997 SC 363] : 1997 Cr LJ 2493 , ghastly murder, order of acquittal
set aside, eye-witnesses, minor discrepancies not damaging their testimony, injuries on person
of accused, superficial. Jit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1997 SC 3676 [LNIND 1996 SC 1644] :
1997 Cr LJ 2500 , evidence of child witness, conviction.
Amit v State of UP, (2012) 4 SCC 107 [LNIND 2012 SC 138] : AIR 2012 SC 1433 [LNIND 2012 SC
138] and State of UP v Iqram, AIR 2011 SC 2296 [LNIND 2011 SC 556] : 2011 8 SCC 80 [LNIND
2011 SC 556] : 2011 Cr LJ 3931 , Non-recovery of weapon insignificant. Katta Kumudu v State of
AP, AIR 1997 SC 2428 [LNINDORD 1997 SC 122] : 1997 Cr LJ 2979 , soon before the incident,
the accused uttered words saying what he would do with him (the deceased). The court said
that intention to kill him could be inferred from these words. Dwarkanath Tiwary v State of Bihar,
AIR 1997 SC 2457 [LNIND 1997 SC 714] : 1997 Cr LJ 2983 , each of the accused persons fired at
deceased in quick succession and hit, conviction of all though medical evidence was of only
two bullet injuries. State of UP v Abdul, AIR 1997 SC 2512 [LNIND 1997 SC 790] : 1997 Cr LJ
2997 (SC), High Court erred in ordering acquittal, set aside. Razakali Khureshi v State of Gujarat,
AIR 1999 SC 2538 : 1997 Cr LJ 3119 , conviction did not suffer from any infirmity. Pratapaneni
Ravi Kumar v State of AP, AIR 1997 SC 2810 [LNIND 1997 SC 892] : 1997 Cr LJ 3505 , murder
caused in furtherance of common object, all members guilty, it being immaterial whether all of
them had beaten the deceased. Asha v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1997 SC 2828 [LNIND 1997 SC
844] : 1997 Cr LJ 3508 , three motor-cycle borne accused persons, two of them threw acid on
victim, and caused injuries, their conviction proper. Mangat Rai v State of Punjab, AIR 1997 SC
2838 : 1997 Cr LJ 3514 , murder of wife, conviction. Madru Singh v State of MP, 1997 Cr LJ 4398
: AIR 1997 SC 3527 [LNIND 1997 SC 1182] , presence and evidence of eye-witnesses could not
be doubted on the basis of some trivial contradictions. State of Punjab v Jaswant Singh, 1997 Cr
LJ 4428 : AIR 1997 SC 3821 [LNIND 1997 SC 1200] , private defence not available because
simple injuries on the person of the accused found to be self-inflicted, conviction under section
302. Rukma v Jala, AIR 1997 SC 3907 [LNIND 1997 SC 1069] : 1997 Cr LJ 4651 , complaint
about investigation not sustained, the complainant party suffering greater number of injuries
than the accused could not be entitled to private defence. Baimullah v State of UP, 1997 Cr LJ
4644 : AIR 1997 SC 3946 [LNIND 1997 SC 1322] , injury caused on vital part of body of an
unarmed person, plea of private defence negatived. Gopal Madadeo v State of Maharashtra, 1997
Cr LJ 2425 (Bom), the fact that the accused was of 76 years of age was no reason for his not
serving his term of life imprisonment when he was squarely guilty of the offence. Amar Malla v
State of Tripura, AIR 2002 SC 3052 [LNIND 2002 SC 517] , armed attack at a meeting by accused
persons who were also invited to attend, killings, conviction, non-explanation of injuries on
accused persons cannot by itself be a ground for throwing out the prosecution case. Mohibur
Rahman v State of Assam, AIR 2002 SC 3064 , accused last seen in the company of deceased,
he gave false explanations about the whereabouts of the deceased, dead body cut into pieces
recovered from different places pointed out by the accused. Conviction of the accused was not
interfered with. Mahadeo Sahni v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 3032 [LNIND 2002 SC 492] , injuries
caused to deceased by sharp-edged and blunt weapons, concurrent finding that the accused
persons inflicted injuries in prosecution of their common object of doing away with the lives of
the deceased persons. Conviction under section 302 not interfered with.
Lakshmi v State of UP, AIR 2002 SC 3119 [LNIND 2002 SC 534] , a charge of murder can be
substantiated even in the absence of identification and cause of death. Bodh Raj v State of J&K,
AIR 2002 SC 3164 [LNIND 2002 SC 539] , conviction for murder, elimination of creditor by
person indebted. Sahadevan v State, AIR 2003 SC 215 [LNIND 2002 SC 688] : 2003 Cr LJ 424 ,
conviction for murder under sections 300, 346, 302 read with section 34. Alamgir v State (NCT,
Delhi), AIR 2003 SC 282 [LNIND 2002 SC 693] : 2003 Cr LJ 456 , staying with wife in guest house
and causing her death, circumstantial evidence been proved the case, conviction. P
Venkateswarlu v State of AP, 2003 Cr LJ 837 : AIR 2003 SC 574 [LNIND 2002 SC 782] , whole
village divided on political lines. Death caused by one faction of a person belonging to the other,
conviction because of good evidence. State of UP v Jagdeo, AIR 2003 SC 660 [LNIND 2002 SC
781] : 2003 Cr LJ 844 , ghastly crime, all the eight accused persons, armed with deadly
weapons, attacked unarmed members of the victim's family sleeping in the open at night. The
accused could not be acquitted only because the investigation was faulty. Suraj Bhan v State of
Haryana, AIR 2003 SC 785 [LNIND 2002 SC 826] , the evidence of the injured eye-witness that
the accused administered total blow on head of his victim, it was corroborated by medical
evidence, the finding of the High Court that the accused was responsible for the death was held
to be proper. State of Karnataka v Panchakshari Gurupadayya Hiranath, AIR 2003 SC 825 [LNIND
2002 SC 856] , land dispute leading to attack on deceased with a murderous weapon
established by evidence. Conviction. State of UP v Man Singh, 2003 Cr LJ 82 , reversal of
conviction held improper, good evidence was there. Amarsingh v Balwinder Singh, 2003 Cr LJ
1282 (SC), conviction for murder was based upon direct testimony of eye-witnesses under the
finding of the trial court that the prosecution case was fully established, the Supreme Court held
that acquittal by the High Court by reversing conviction was not proper. State of UP v Premi,
2003 Cr LJ 1554 : AIR 2003 SC 1750 [LNIND 2003 SC 232] , the accused persons entered the
house of the deceased at midnight armed with country made pistol, inflicted injury on the head
with great force and caused death. The court said that the mere fact that only one injury was
caused was not enough to alter the conviction from section 302 to section 304. Gaya Yadav v
State of Bihar, 2003 Cr LJ 1564 : AIR 2003 SC 1759 [LNIND 2003 SC 215] , proper evidence for
conviction. Kanaksingh v State of Gujarat, 2003 Cr LJ 855 (SC), killing of wife, conviction.
Ajitsingh Andubha Parmal v State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 SC 3469 [LNIND 2002 SC 609] , there was
specific and clear evidence that the accused gave the first two knife blows and further serious
injuries by chasing him. Concurrent finding of fact as to guilt, no interference. Mohar v State of
UP, AIR 2003 SC 3279 , conviction because of eye-witnesses. State of Karnataka v David Razario,
AIR 2002 SC 3272 [LNIND 2002 SC 583] , conviction for robbery and murder. Shyam Sunder v
State of Chhatisgarh, AIR 2002 SC 3292 [LNIND 2002 SC 1866] , conviction for murder, eye-
witnesses. Dana Yadav v State of Bihar, AIR 2002 SC 3325 [LNIND 2002 SC 574] , conviction on
the basis of eye-witnesses. Gyasiram v State of MP, AIR 2003 SC 2097 [LNIND 2003 SC 1] , the
accused party waited for their victim, fired at him, killing witnessed, eye-witnesses reliable,
conviction. State of UP v Ram Sewak, AIR 2003 SC 2141 [LNIND 2002 SC 828] , properly
witnessed case, acquittal was held to be not proper. Rambai v State of Chhatisgarh, AIR 2002 SC
3492 [LNIND 2002 SC 635] , conviction on the basis of dying declaration. Shamsher Singh v
State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 3480 [LNIND 2002 SC 605] , eye-witnesses, recoveries of
weapons, etc, conviction. Swaran Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2002 SC 3652 [LNIND 2002 SC
639] , credit of eye-witnesses could not be shaken, conviction. G Laxmanna v State of AP, AIR
2002 SC 3685 , relative witnesses, outstanding enmity, conviction. Thaman Kumar v State, UT of
Chandigarh, 2003 Cr LJ 3070 (SC), murder charge proved by direct evidence, not allowed to be
shaken by hypothetical medical evidence. State of UP v Rasid, 2003 Cr LJ 2011 (SC), time of
killing, if it were after day-break, identification of the assailants was possible, this was the stand
of the eye-witnesses, but the High Court went by the medical evidence of presence of semi-
digested food in the stomach of the deceased which showed that the occurrence must belong
to the night. The Supreme Court said that medical evidence was not clear and, therefore, the
eye-witness account had to be preferred. Rajendra Prabhu Chikane v State of Maharashtra, (2007)
13 SCC 511 [LNIND 2007 SC 515] : 2007 Cr LJ 3410 , murder by accused proved beyond
reasonable doubt, conviction upheld. MA Sattar v State of AP, (2008) 11 SCC 201 [LNIND 2008
SC 754] , clear proof of murder by accused. Umar Md v State of Rajasthan, (2007) 14 SCC 711
[LNIND 2007 SC 1459] : 2008 Cr LJ 816 .
38. Rampal Singh v State of UP, 2012 Cr LJ 3765 : (2012) 8 SCC 289 [LNIND 2012 SC 425] .
39. Arjun v State of Rajasthan, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 410 : AIR 1994 SC 2507 [LNIND 1994 SC 604] ,
concurrent finding of courts below as to intentional murder, not interfered with in appeal. Ram
Kumar v State of Haryana, 1995 Supp (1) SCC 248 : 1994 Cr LJ 3836 (SC), conviction on the
evidence of injured eye-witness. Sarbir Singh v State of Punjab, 1993 AIR SCW 807 : 1993 Cr LJ
1395 (SC), circumstantial evidence, conviction; Surjit Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 1389
[LNIND 1992 SC 361] : 1992 Cr LJ 1952 ; Lakhwinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1993 SC 87 :
1992 Cr LJ 3958 , testimony of eye-witnesses convincing, conviction upheld. Other such cases
are: Prakash v State of MP, AIR 1993 SC 70 : 1992 Cr LJ 3703 (SC); Mafabhai N Raval v State of
Gujarat, AIR 1992 SC 2186 [LNIND 1992 SC 509] : 1992 Cr LJ 3710 and Bir Singh v State of
Haryana, AIR 1992 SC 2211 : 1992 Cr LJ 3845 : 1993 Supp (1) SCC 334 ; Ram Kumar v State of
UP, AIR 1992 SC 1602 : 1992 Cr LJ 2421 , acquittal set aside because circumstantial evidence
reliable. Baboo v State of MP, AIR 1994 SC 1712 : 1994 Cr LJ 2249 , several persons attacked
and killed a man in the presence of his wife, whose evidence found support in the testimony of
other witnesses, conviction upheld though no FIR lodged. Ch Madhusudana Reddy v State of AP,
1994 Cr LJ 2203 : AIR 1994 SCW 1453 , only those convicted who actually participated, others
acquitted. PP Karpe v State of Maharashtra, 1993 Cr LJ 2302 (Bom), revengeful killing, conviction
for murder. Balak Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 2451 (Raj), killer of his two daughters,
eye-witnesses, medical evidence, conviction under section 300. Prem Raj v State of Maharashtra,
1996 Cr LJ 2876 : AIR 1996 SC 3294 [LNIND 1996 SC 940] , all the accused constituting an
unlawful assembly came to the shop of the deceased, assaulted him and continued to do so
after dragging him out, conviction under sections 300/149 held proper. Bhagubhai v State of
Gujarat, AIR 1996 SC 2555 [LNIND 1996 SC 1143] : 1996 Cr LJ 3581 , the deceased forcibly
taken from field to Panchayat office and set on fire after pouring kerosene, 75% burns and other
injuries sufficient to cause death, conviction for intention to murder proper.
40. Gunga Singh, (1873) 5 NWP 44. Raju Das v State of Rajasthan, 1995 Cr LJ 25 (Raj), a case of
proved intentional murder.
41. Shakti Vahini v UOI, AIR 2018 SC 1601 [LNIND 2018 SC 136] : 2018 (7) SCC 192 [LNIND
2018 SC 136] .
42. Arumugam Servai v State of TN, (2011) 6 SCC 405 [LNIND 2011 SC 435] . See Dandu
Jaggaraju v State of AP, AIR 2011 SC 3387 [LNINDORD 2011 SC 217] : 2011 Cr LJ 4956 , honour
killing, not proved, acquitted the accused.
43. Bhagwan Dass v State (NCT) of Delhi, AIR 2011 SC 1863 [LNIND 2011 SC 502] : 2011 Cr LJ
2903 : (2011) 6 SCC 396 [LNIND 2011 SC 502] . In the 242nd report, the Law Commission of
India opined that "we are constrained to say that such a blanket direction given by the Supreme
Court making death sentence a rule in 'honour killings' cases, makes a departure from the
principles firmly entrenched in our criminal jurisprudence by virtue of a series of Supreme Court
Judgments."; In State of UP v Krishna Master, AIR 2010 SC 3071 [LNIND 2010 SC 699] : 2010 Cr
LJ 3889 : (2010) 12 SCC 324 [LNIND 2010 SC 699] , though the killing of six persons and wiping
out almost the whole family on flimsy ground of honour saving of the family would fall within
the rarest of rare case, keeping in view that the incident took place 20 years ago and High Court
acquitted them in the year 2002 accused sentenced to RI for life.
44. Law of Commission of India, 242nd Report, Prevention of Interference with the Freedom of
Matrimonial Alliances (in the name of Honour and Tradition): A Suggested Legal Framework,
available at : http://lawcommissionofindia.nic.in/reports/report242.pdf (last accessed in July
2019).
45. Shakti Vahini v UOI, AIR 2018 SC 1601 [LNIND 2018 SC 136] : 2018 (7) SCC 192 [LNIND
2018 SC 136] .
46. AG Bhagwat (Dr) v UT Chandigarh, 1989 Cr LJ 214 (P&H), convicted for grievous hurt. Jabbar
Suleman v State of Gujarat, 1988 Cr LJ 515 (Guj), knife injury on thigh of deceased, knowledge
but not intention to cause death attributed, punishable under section 304 Part II not I. Sudam
Kisan Dhurjad v State of Maharashtra, 1995 Cr LJ 4029 (Bom), the accused assaulted a bed-
ridden aged lady of 65 years with an axe on her forehead causing three injuries resulting in
fracture of the frontal bone and she died within a couple of hours, his act was held to fall under
section 300, clauses 2, 3 and 4 and not under section 304, Part II. Patel Hiralal Tottaram v State
of Gujarat, (2002) 1 SCC 22 [LNIND 2001 SC 2382] , the woman was set ablaze after soaking her
clothes with an inflammable substance. She died 14 days after the incident. The accused was
not heard to say that the death might have been due to some intervening causes. The act of the
accused showed his intention to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as was likely to
cause death. Sajjan Singh v State of MP, 1998 Cr LJ 4073 : AIR 1998 SC 2756 [LNIND 1998 SC
839] , head injury caused, sufficient in the ordinary course of nature. Ram Bihari Yadav v State of
Bihar, 1998 Cr LJ 2515 : AIR 1999 SC 1850 , the husband set his wife ablaze, conduct showed
guilt, no sign of accident, conviction. Arun Nivalaji More v State of Maharashtra, (2006) 12 SCC
613 [LNIND 2006 SC 591] : AIR 2006 SC 2886 [LNIND 2006 SC 591] : 2006 Cr LJ 4057 , the
clause imports some kind of certainty and not mere probability, there was no such certain
knowledge on the facts of this case.
47. Anant Chintaman Lagu, (1959) 62 Bom LR 371 (SC); Mohan v State, AIR 1960 SC 659 ;
Kaushalya Devi, AIR 1965 Ori 38 [LNIND 1964 ORI 72] . Swinder Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1952
SC 669 : 1960 Cr LJ 1011 , proof on these points being not available, acquittal.
48. Also Chandra Kant Nyalchand v State of Bombay, Criminal Appeal No 120 of 1957, decided,
Feb 19, 1958.
49. Anant Chintaman Lagu v State of Bombay, AIR 1960 SC 500 [LNIND 1959 SC 223] : 1960 Cr
LJ 682 .
50. Bhupinder Singh v State of Punjab, 1988 Cr LJ 1097 : AIR 1988 SC 1011 [LNIND 1988 SC
211] : (1988) 3 SCC 513 [LNIND 1988 SC 211] : 1988 SCC (Cr) 694.
51. Ramgopal, 1972 Cr LJ 473 (SC) : AIR 1972 SC 656 . Followed in Sher Singh v State, (1995) 2
Cr LJ 2187 (Del), alleged poisoning by mixing in liquor not proved. Abdul Gani v State of
Karnataka, (1995) 2 Cr LJ 2248 (Kant), presence of the husband in the room where his wife was
strangulated not proved, conviction on the basis of suspicion was held to be not proper. Mal
Singh v State of Rajasthan, (1995) 2 Cr LJ 2279 , acquitted because of no evidence.
52. Arundhati, 1968 Cr LJ 848 . Murder by poisoning, the victim found vomitting even two days
before the date of purchase of poison and other evidence did not inspire confidence. The
accused were given benefit of doubt, acquitted of the charge of murder, Rattni v State of HP,
1993 Cr LJ 1811 (SC). Sanjiv Kumar v State of HP, AIR 1999 SC 782 [LNIND 1999 SC 55] : 1999
Cr LJ 1138 , intentional killing by poisoning proved by circumstantial evidence. State of Bihar v
Ramnath Prasad, AIR 1998 SC 466 [LNIND 1997 SC 1581] : 1998 Cr LJ 679 , poison served as
prasad, the accused had only knowledge that he was administering a poisonous substance
which was likely to cause grievous hurt or even death. Liable to be convicted under section 304,
Part II and section 326.
53. Joydeb Patra v State of WB, 2013 Cr LJ 2729 (SC) : AIR 2013 SCW 2744 .
54. Nanhar v State of Haryana, 2010 Cr LJ 3450 : (2010) 11 SCC 423 [LNINDORD 2010 SC 229] .
55. State of Rajasthan v Dhool Singh, (2004) 12 SCC 546 [LNIND 2003 SC 1120] : AIR 2004 SC
1264 [LNIND 2003 SC 1120] : 2004 Cr LJ 931 .
56. Abbas Ali v State of Rajasthan, (2007) 9 SCC 129 [LNIND 2007 SC 165] : AIR 2007 SC 1239
[LNIND 2007 SC 165] : 2007 Cr LJ 1667 , the ingredients of clause thirdly restated.
57. Mangesh v State of Maharashtra, (2011) 2 SCC 123 [LNIND 2011 SC 20] .
58. Brij Bhukhan, AIR 1957 SC 474 : 1957 Cr LJ 591 .
59. Atmaram v State of MP, (2012) 5 SCC 738 [LNINDORD 2012 SC 403] : 2012 Cr LJ 2882 :
2012 (5) Scale 300 [LNIND 2012 SC 309] relied on Anda v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1996 SC 148
[LNIND 1965 SC 75] ; State of Andhra Pradesh v Rayavarapu Punnayya, (1976) 4 SCC 382 [LNIND
1976 SC 331] .
60. Virsa Singh v State, AIR 1958 SC 465 [LNIND 1958 SC 19] , (1958) SCR 1495 [LNIND 1958
SC 19] ; Rajwant Singh, AIR 1966 SC 1874 [LNIND 1966 SC 125] : 1966 Cr LJ 1509 . Khachar Dipu
v State of Gujarat, 2013 (4) SCC 322 [LNIND 2013 SC 278] .
61. Jaspal Singh v State of Punjab, (1986) 2 SCC 100 at p 103 : AIR 1986 SC 683 : 1986 Cr LJ
488 , per Balakrishna Eradi, J. For an example of circumstantial evidence alone failing to prove
an intention, see Padala Veera Reddy v State of AP, 1990 Cr LJ 605 : AIR 1990 SC 79 : 1989 Supp
(2) SCC 706 . In Jagtar Singh v State of Punjab, (1988) 1 SCC 712 [LNIND 1988 SC 65] : AIR 1988
SC 628 [LNIND 1988 SC 65] : 1988 Cr LJ 866 , which was a case of intentional murder, the
Supreme Court ignored the fact that FIR did not mention the crucial fact of the accused running
away leaving behind his vehicle. In Narendra Singh v State of UP, AIR 1987 SC 1268 : 1987 Cr LJ
1070 : (1987) 2 SCC 236 , repeated blows were inflicted on vital parts of the body. This was held
to be intentional murder. Vinod Kumar v State of UP, AIR 1991 SC 300 : 1991 Cr LJ 360 , defence
of accidental shooting ruled out.
62. Jai Prakash v State (Delhi Admn), (1991) 2 SCC 32 : (1991) 1 Crimes 474 : 1991 SCC (Cri)
299 . Reiterated in Kesar Singh v State of Haryana, (2008) 15 SCC 753 [LNIND 2008 SC 1001] , it
does not matter that there was no intention to cause death, or even to cause an injury of a kind
that is sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature (not that there is any real
distinction between the two), or that there is no knowledge that an act of that kind will be likely
to cause death. Once the intention to cause the bodily injury is actually found to be proved, the
rest of the enquiry is purely objective and the only question is whether, as a matter of purely
objective inference, the injury is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
Namdeo v State of Maharashtra, (2007) 14 SCC 150 [LNIND 2007 SC 316] : 2007 Cr LJ 1819 ,
head injury caused with axe sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, hence
intention was to cause death. Sheikh Rafi v State of AP, (2007) 13 SCC 76 [LNIND 2007 SC 522] :
2007 Cr LJ 2746 , 19 injuries caused in a quick succession and also in a cruel manner, deceased
being unarmed and helpless. Clause (3) applied, punishable under section 302. Settu v State of
TN, 2006 Cr LJ 3889 , no intention to cause death, but injury caused with a knife on a vital part
and which was sufficient to cause death, amounted to murder. One companion was convicted
under section 304, Part I and the other under section 326, because minor injuries on non-vital
parts.
63. Rampal Singh v State of UP, 2012 (8) SCC 289 [LNIND 2012 SC 425] .
64. Vineet Kumar Chauhan v State of UP, 2007 (14) SCC 660 [LNIND 2007 SC 1509] .
65. Ajit Singh v State of Punjab, 2011 (9) SCC 462 [LNIND 2011 SC 844] .
66. Mohinder Pal Jolly v State of Punjab, 1979 (3) SCC 30 [LNIND 1978 SC 389] .
67. Khachar Dipu v State of Gujarat, 2013 (4) SCC 322 [LNIND 2013 SC 278] .
68. Anda, AIR 1966 SC 148 [LNIND 1965 SC 75] : 1966 Cr LJ 171 .
69. Rajwant Singh, supra. Seven-year-old child held by the legs and dashed against the ground
three times in quick succession, held covered by this clause. Shankar Narayan Bhadolkar v State
of Maharashtra, AIR 2004 SC 1966 [LNIND 2004 SC 1370] : 2004 Cr LJ 1778 : (2005) 9 SCC 71
[LNIND 2004 SC 1370] , a restatement of the basic approach of the clause. The court also made
a comparison between the statement in clause 2 of section 299 "bodily injury likely to cause
death" with "bodily injury sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death" in clause 3 in
section 300.
70. Umesh Singh v State of Bihar, 2013 (4) SCC 360 [LNIND 2013 SC 227] : 2013 Cr LJ 2116 ;
AIR 2013 SC 1743 [LNIND 2013 SC 227] ; Gajoo v State of Uttarakhand, 2013 Cr LJ 88 ; 2012 (9)
SCC; Kuria v State of Rajasthan, 2012 Cr LJ 4707 : (2012) 10 SCC 433 [LNIND 2012 SC 678] ;
Darbara Singh v State of Punjab, 2012 Cr LJ 4757 ; 2012 (8) Scale 649 [LNIND 2012 SC 545] ;
(2012) 10 SCC 476 [LNIND 2012 SC 545] .
71. Abdul Sayeed v State of MP, (2010) 10 SCC 259 [LNIND 2010 SC 872] : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri)
1262 [LNIND 2010 SC 872] , Ram Narain Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 1975 SC 1727 [LNIND 1975
SC 210] ; State of Haryana v Bhagirath, (1999) 5 SCC 96 [LNIND 1999 SC 541] ; Thaman Kumar v
State of Union Territory of Chandigarh, (2003) 6 SCC 380 [LNIND 2003 SC 507] ; and Krishnan v
State, (2003) 7 SCC 56 [LNIND 2003 SC 587] ; Solanki Chimanbhai Ukabhai v State of Gujarat, AIR
1983 SC 484 [LNIND 1983 SC 69] ; Mani Ram v State of UP, 1994 Supp (2) SCC 289 ; Khambam
Raja Reddy v Public Prosecutor, High Court of AP, (2006) 11 SCC 239 [LNIND 2006 SC 753] ; and
State of UP v Dinesh, (2009) 11 SCC 566 [LNIND 2009 SC 454] . State of UP v Hari Chand, (2009)
13 SCC 542 [LNIND 2009 SC 1039] ; In Sayed Darain Ahsan v State of WB, (2012) 4 SCC 352
[LNIND 2012 SC 197] : AIR 2012 SC 1286 [LNIND 2012 SC 197] : 2012 Cr LJ 1980 , it is found
that the medical evidence does not go so far as to rule out all possibility of the ocular evidence
being true and hence the ocular evidence cannot be disbelieved.
72. Sunil Kundu v State of Jharkhand, (2013) 4 SCC 422 [LNIND 2013 SC 1135] : 2013 Cr LJ
2339 (SC) In Anjani Chaudhary, (2011) 2 SCC 747 [LNIND 2010 SC 1048] , where the medical
evidence did not support the appellant's presence as there was no injury on the deceased which
could be caused by a lathi and the appellant was stated to be carrying a lathi. Since the eye-
witnesses therein were not found to be reliable, Supreme Court acquitted the appellant therein.
In Kapildeo Mandal, (2008) 16 SCC 99 [LNIND 2007 SC 1390] , all the eye-witnesses had
categorically stated that the deceased was injured by the use of firearm, whereas the medical
evidence specifically indicated that no firearm injury was found on the deceased. Court held
that, when the evidence of the eye-witnesses is totally inconsistent with the evidence given by
the medical experts, then evidence is appreciated in a different perspective by the courts. It was
observed that when medical evidence specifically rules out the injury claimed to have been
inflicted as per the eye-witnesses' version, then the court can draw adverse inference that the
prosecution version is not trustworthy.
73. Bhagwati Prasad v State of MP, (2010) 1 SCC 697 [LNIND 2009 SC 2058] : 2009 (14) Scale
314 [LNIND 2009 SC 2058] : AIR 2010 SC 349 [LNIND 2009 SC 2058] : 2010 Cr LJ 528 .
74. Kuna v State of Odisha, AIR 2017 SC 5364 [LNIND 2017 SC 2864] .
75. Kesar Singh v State of Haryana, (2008) 15 SCC 753 [LNIND 2008 SC 1001] .
76. Lakshman, (1888) Unrep Cr C 411.
77. Nga Maung, (1907) 13 Burma LR 330.
78. Judagi Mallah, (1929) 8 Pat 911.
79. Shankar Narayan Bhadolkar v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2004 SC 1966 [LNIND 2004 SC 1370]
: 2004 Cr LJ 1778 , explanation of importance of knowledge in the context of the clause.
80. Ram Prasad, AIR 1968 SC 881 [LNIND 1967 SC 358] : 1968 Cr LJ 1025 . See Dev Raj v State
of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 950 : 1992 Cr LJ 1292 : 1992 Supp (2) SCC 81 , gun-shot injuries, death
occurring one and a half months later, in between surgery and amputation, held accused guilty
of grievous hurt. State of Karnataka v Venkatesh, AIR 1992 SC 674 : 1992 Cr LJ 707 : 1992 (1)
Crimes 625 SC : JT 1992 (1) SC 99 : 1992 (1) Scale 31 : 1992 Supp (1) SCC 539 .
81. State of Haryana v Krishan, AIR 2017 SC 3125 [LNIND 2017 SC 294] .
82. Umakant v State of Chhatisgarh, 2014 Cr LJ 4078 : 2014 (8) Scale 141 [LNIND 2014 SC 374]
.
83. DV Shanmugham v State of AP, AIR 1997 SC 2583 [LNIND 1997 SC 720] : 1997 Cr LJ 3129 ,
some of the accused persons were, however, given the benefit of doubt because there was no
clear evidence against them. State of UP v Shri Krishan, 2005 Cr LJ 892 : AIR 2005 SC 762
[LNIND 2004 SC 1252] : (2005) 10 SCC 399 [LNIND 2004 SC 1252] , the wife was with the man
at the time when the husband alone was killed by the assailants. Her FIR was recorded after 13
days, this fact alongwith some other details created a doubt about the prosecution case of
which the benefit went to the assailants. State of AP v Patnam Anandam, 2005 Cr LJ 894 : AIR
2005 SC 764 [LNIND 2004 SC 1241] : (2005) 9 SCC 237 [LNIND 2004 SC 1241] , another similar
case of benefit of doubt. Jagjit Singh v State of Punjab, 2005 Cr LJ 955 : AIR 2005 SC 913 :
(2005) 3 SCC 689 , accused alleged to have killed three persons at the tubewell sight coming
there by motor cycle. A girl child of seven years was supposed to be the eye-witness. She had
never seen the accused before, her statement was recorded after three days, not reliable,
acquittal on benefit of doubt. Puran Singh v State of Uttaranchal, (2008) 3 SCC 725 : 2008 Cr LJ
1058 : (2008) 1 Ker LJ 875 , benefit of doubt allowed on the basis of technical evidence.
84. State of TN v Balkrishna, 1992 Cr LJ 1872 (Mad).
85. Mohammad Khalil Chisti (Dr) v State of Rajasthan, 2013 Cr LJ 637 (SC), 2013 (1) Mad LJ (Cr)
198, (2013) 2 SCC 541 [LNIND 2012 SC 801] ; Waman v State of Maharashtra, 2011 (7) SCC 295
[LNIND 2011 SC 564] : AIR 2011 SC 3327 [LNIND 2011 SC 564] : 2011 Cr LJ 4827 ; Lakshmi
Singh v State of Bihar, 1976 SCC (Cr) 671 : AIR 1976 SC 2263 : 1976 Cr LJ 1736 , non-
explanation of simple injuries of the nature suffered by the accused would not be fatal; Ram
Vishambhar v State of UP, 2013 Cr LJ 1131 : (2013) 2 SCC 71 [LNINDU 2013 SC 5] ; Hari v State
of Maharashtra, (2009) 11 SCC 96 [LNIND 2009 SC 642] : (2009) 3 SCC (Cr) 1254.
86. Nokul Nushyo, (1867) 7 WR (Cr) 27; Akhila Parida v State of Orissa, 1987 Cr LJ 609 (Ori),
provocation by cutting the crop of accused. See also Nagar Prasad v State of UP, 1998 Cr LJ
1580 (All).
87. Sukhlal Sarkar v UOI, (2012) 5 SCC 703 [LNIND 2012 SC 364] : 2012 Cr LJ 3032 .
88. Laikhan, (1955) Cut 625.
89. Kundarapu, (1962) 1 Cr LJ 261 . Jagjit Singh v State of HP, 1994 Cr LJ 233 : 1994 SCC (Cr)
176, the accused inflicted a number of serious injuries on the vital parts of the body of his victim
causing his death on the spot, held Exception 1 of section 300 not attracted. Pappachan v State
of Kerala, 1994 Cr LJ 1765 (Ker), the accused delivered a fatal stab wound to the person who
tried to pacify him, no evidence of any sudden and grave provocation or a sudden fight. The
offence did not fall under Exception 1 or 2 of section 300.
90. KM Nanavati v State of Maharashtra, AIR 1962 SC 605 [LNIND 1961 SC 362] : 1962 Cr LJ 521
(SC).
91. Budhi Singh v State of HP, 2013 Cr LJ 962 (SC) : AIR 2013 (SCW) 547 .
92. KM Nanavati, (1962) Bom LR 488 : AIR 1962 SC 605 [LNIND 1961 SC 362] : 1962 Cr LJ 521
(SC); Akhtar v State, AIR 1964 All 262 [LNIND 1963 ALL 180] . Girja Devi v State of HP, 2000 Cr LJ
1528 (HP), the accused wife killed her husband being provoked by his perverse sexual habits,
punished under section 304, Part I.
93. Dhandayuthan v State of TN, 1994 Cr LJ 1587 (Mad).
94. Gyanendra Kumar v State, 1972 Cr LJ 308 : AIR 1972 SC 502 [LNIND 1971 SC 601] ; see also
Panchu Kumar Sardar, 1984 Cr LJ (NOC) 142 (Cal); Balerian Minji, 1985 Cr LJ 1394 (MP). Where
the accused on being slapped by the deceased ran to his house which was at considerable
distance and brought several deadly weapons and inflicted various injuries on the deceased two
of which proved fatal, his action was indicative of his intention to kill the victim, he was held to
be rightly punished for murder
95. BD Khunte v UOI, 2015 Cr LJ 243 .
96. Dhandayuthan v State, 1994 Cr LJ 1587 .
97. Murgi Munda, (1938) 18 Pat 101.
98. Balku, (1938) All 789 ; Hussain, (1938) 20 Lah 278.
99. Re V Padayachi, 1972 Cr LJ 1641 (Mad).
100. Hansa Singh, 1977 Cr LJ 1448 (SC).
101. Ram Prakash Singh v State of Bihar, AIR 1998 SC 1190 [LNIND 1998 SC 137] : 1998 Cr LJ
1622 , conduct of accused in the jail being good, his sentence was reduced to the period already
undergone during trial plus jail term. Bishek Mohandas v State of Orissa, 1998 Cr LJ 1489 (Ori),
quarrel, one picked up an instrument and struck the other, himself also injured, for the ensuing
death, conviction under section 304, Part II.
102. Note M p 147. Kehar Singh v State, 1997 Cr LJ 1753 (Raj), water diverted from the accused
person's field by the victim to his field without justification, the accused had the right to resort to
self-defence of property, but the number of injuries caused was so great as to be sure to cause
death, right exceeded, conviction under section 304, Part I.
103. Raj Singh v State of Haryana, 2015 Cr LJ 2803 .
104. Mohammad Khalil Chisti (Dr) v State of Rajasthan, 2013 Cr LJ637 (SC) : 2013 (1) Mad LJ
(Cr) 198, (2013) 2 SCC 541 [LNIND 2012 SC 801] ; Gopal v State of Rajasthan, (2013) 2 SCC 188
[LNIND 2013 SC 37] : 2013 Cr LJ 1297 .
105. Arjun v State of Maharashtra, JT 2012 (4) SC 447 : 2012 (5) Scale 52 [LNIND 2012 SC 283] :
AIR 2012 SC 2181 [LNIND 2012 SC 283] : (2012) 5 SCC 530 [LNIND 2012 SC 283] : 2012 Cr LJ
2641 . See also Mohammad Iqbal v State of MP, 2012 Cr LJ 337 (Chh).
106. Sikandar Singh v State of Bihar, (2010) 7 SCC 477 [LNIND 2010 SC 603] : (2010) 8 SCR 373
: AIR 2010 SC 44023 : 2010 Cr LJ 3854 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cr) 417.
107. Raj Pal v State of Haryana, (2006) 9 SCC 678 [LNIND 2006 SC 282] : JT 2006 (11) SC 124
[LNIND 2006 SC 282] : (2006) 4 Scale 456 [LNIND 2006 SC 282] : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 361 [LNIND
2006 SC 282] .
108. Mohd Yusuf v State of UP, 1994 Cr LJ 1631 , 2181.
109. PP Sah, 1977 Cr LJ 346 : AIR 1977 SC 704 .
110. Rafiq, 1979 Cr LJ 706 : AIR 1979 SC 1179 .
111. Ghansham Dass, 1979 Cr LJ 28 : AIR 1979 SC 44 .
112. Jassa Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 520 [LNIND 2002 SC 13] . Latel v State of
Chhatisgarh, AIR 2001 SC 3474 , possession of the disputed land was with the accused, but the
deceased was ploughing it at the relevant time, the accused and his son attacked him and
continued to do so even after he had fallen down, held, right of private defence exceeded,
punishment under section 304, Part I. State of Karnataka v Shivappa, (1993) Cr LJ 1253 : AIR
1998 SC 1536 [LNIND 1997 SC 1597] , the right of private defence exceeded, conviction.
113. Katta Surendra v State of AP, (2008) 11 SCC 360 [LNIND 2008 SC 1294] : 2008 Cr LJ 3196 .
114. See also Thomas George v State of Kerala, 2000 Cr LJ 3475 : 1999 SCC (Cr) 1308,
exceeding the right of private defence, conviction under section 304, Part II.
115. Subba Naik, (1898) 21 Mad 249.
116. Satyavir Singh Rathi v State Thr CBI, AIR 2011 SC 1748 [LNIND 2011 SC 475] : (2011) 6 SCC
1 [LNIND 2011 SC 475] : 2011 Cr LJ 2908 .
117. Vijender Kumar v State of Delhi, 2010 Cr LJ 3851 : (2010) 12 SCC 381 [LNIND 2010 SC 413]
: (2011) 1 SCC (Cr) 29.
118. Santokh Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2009 SC 1923 [LNIND 2009 SC 328] : (2009) 11 SCC
197 [LNIND 2009 SC 328] ; Arumugam v State Rep by Inspector of Police TN, AIR 2009 SC 331
[LNIND 2008 SC 1994] : (2008) 15 SCC 590 [LNIND 2008 SC 1994] .
119. State of Rajasthan v Islam, (2011) 6 SCC 343 [LNINDORD 2011 SC 309] : AIR 2011 SC 2317
[LNINDORD 2011 SC 309] : 2011 Cr LJ 3110 , plea that only one injury of small dimension had
been caused by appellant to the deceased in the abdomen and he had himself taken the
deceased to hospital, an inference be drawn that there was no intention to kill the deceased
repelled. The case of the appellant cannot fall within Exception 4 of section 300, IPC, 1860.
Vijender Kumar v State of Delhi, 2010 Cr LJ 3851 : (2010) 12 SCC 381 [LNIND 2010 SC 413] :
(2011) 1 SCC (Cr) 291.
120. Abdul Nawaz v State of WB, 2012 Cr LJ 2901 : (2012) 6 SCC 581 [LNIND 2012 SC 307] :
2012 (5) Scale 357 [LNIND 2012 SC 307] ; Chinnathaman v State, 2007 (14) SCC 690 [LNIND
2007 SC 1485] , Muthu v State, 2009 (17) SCC 433 [LNIND 2007 SC 1303] ; Arumugam v State,
2008 (15) SCC 590 [LNIND 2008 SC 1994] ; Ajit Singh v State of Punjab, 2011 (9) SCC 462
[LNIND 2011 SC 844] , Vijay Ramkrishan Gaikwad v State of Maharashtra, 2012 (2) Scale 631 ;
Sayaji Hanmat Bankar v State of Maharashtra, 2011 AIR (SCW) 4502 : 2011 (7) Scale 710 [LNIND
2011 SC 653] : 2011 Cr LJ 4338 : (2011) 8 SCR 234 [LNIND 2011 SC 653] ; State of HP v Ram Pal,
AIR 2005 SC 4058 .
121. Arjun v State of Maharashtra, (2012) 5 SCC 530 [LNIND 2012 SC 283] : 2012 Cr LJ 2641 ,
where the accused appeared and entered the house and had some quarrel with his deceased
wife. He threw water pot and thereafter a kerosene lamp. Burning seems to be more because
lady was wearing nylon sari. She got burnt to the extent of 70%. The Supreme Court held that it
was a case clearly falling under Exception 4 of section 300 of IPC, 1860. Sayaji Hanmat Bankar v
State of Maharashtra, 2011 (7) Scale 710 [LNIND 2011 SC 653] : 2011 Cr LJ 4338 .
122. Nanak Ram v State of Rajasthan, 2014 Cr LJ 1843 : 2014 (I) Supreme 705 .
123. Nayamuddin, (1891) 18 Cal 484 (FB). Where there was no evidence of sudden fight or heat
of passion and the nature, number and situs of injuries showed that there was cruel manner,
conviction for murder, the exception was not attracted, Malkiat Singh v Punjab, AIR 1996 SC
2590 [LNIND 1996 SC 1198] : 1996 Cr LJ 3583 .
124. Zalim Rai, (1864) 1 WR (Cr) 33; Ameera v State, (1866) PR No 12 of 1866. D Sailu v State of
AP, (2007) 14 SCC 397 [LNIND 2007 SC 1347] : AIR 2008 SC 505 [LNIND 2007 SC 1347] : 2008
Cr LJ 686 , injury to a vital organ in a sudden fight, causing death due to shock and
haemorrhage, punishment under section 304, Part I. Byvarapu Raju v State of AP, (2007) 11 SCC
218 [LNIND 2007 SC 761] : AIR 2007 SC 1904 [LNIND 2007 SC 761] : 2007 Cr LJ 3204 , the
father of the accused came in intoxicated state at night and assaulted the son's wife, a resulting
quarrel between father and son in which the son injured his father to death because of the injury
to a vital organ, case covered by Exception 4.
125. State of MP v Shivshankar, 2015 Cr LJ 155 .
126. Surain Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2017 SC 1904 [LNIND 2017 SC 171] .
127. Sunnumuduli, (1946) 25 Pat 335. Kesar Singh v State of Haryana, (2008) 15 SCC 753
[LNIND 2008 SC 1001] , it postulates a bilateral transaction in which blows are exchanged even
if they all do not find their target. Provocation per se is not fight. Asking somebody to do
something again may not be a provocation. Expressing a desire to one's neighbour digging
foundation that some passage may be left may not be considered to be a demand. In instant
case, held, there was no fight, far less sudden fight.
128. Atma Singh, AIR 1955 Punj 191 .
129. Narayanan, AIR 1956 SC 99 [LNIND 1955 KER 138] : 1956 Cr LJ 278 . Golla Yelugu Govindu
v State of AP, (2008) 16 SCC 769 [LNIND 2008 SC 751] : AIR 2008 SC 1842 [LNIND 2008 SC 751]
: 2008 Cr LJ 2607 : (2008) 2 APLJ 28 , ingredients of the exception restated. Trimbak v State of
Maharashtra, (2008) 17 SCC 213 [LNIND 2008 SC 571] , ingredients for bringing the exception
into operation restated. Similar restatement in Hawa Singh v State of Haryana, (2009) 3 SCC 411
[LNIND 2009 SC 77] : (2009) 2 SCC Cri 132 [LNIND 2009 SC 764] : 2009 Cr LJ 1146 . Imtiaz v
State of UP, (2007) 15 SCC 299 [LNIND 2007 SC 172] , dispute about drainage of latrine,
neighbour objected but to no effect, the attackers came fully armed, the court found
premeditation, not suddenness. Iqbal Singh v State of Punjab, (2008) 11 SCC 698 [LNIND 2008
SC 1671] , sudden fight over access to agricultural land, death caused, 10 years under this
exception. SK Azim v State of Maharashtra, (2008) 11 SCC 695 [LNIND 2008 SC 1408] , death
caused in a sudden fight by a single lathi blow on head, 10 years, section 304, Part I. Suresh
Kumar v State of HP, (2008) 13 SCC 459 [LNIND 2008 SC 766] : AIR 2008 SC 1973 [LNIND 2008
SC 766] : 2008 Cr LJ 2247 , single knife blow in sudden fight, death, 10 years, section 304, Part I.
Shankar Diwal Wadu v State of Maharashtra, (2007) 12 SCC 518 [LNIND 2007 SC 363] : AIR 2007
SC 1410 [LNIND 2007 SC 363] : 2007 Cr LJ 1802 , attempt to take away brother's wife by the
brother accused to keep her as a mistress, this resulted in killing of the brother in a sudden fit of
anger, held appropriate conviction under section 304, Part II and not section 302, the accused
was already undergoing imprisonment under sentence for 10 years, sentence reduced to the
period already undergone. Chinnathaman v State, (2007) 14 SCC 690 [LNIND 2007 SC 1485] :
AIR 2008 SC 784 [LNIND 2007 SC 1485] : 2008 Cr LJ 1372 , no premeditation or preplan to
cause death, altercation because of entry into the field, injury caused with sickle lying there,
punishment under section 304, Part II. Phulia Tadu v State of Bihar, (2007) 14 SCC 588 [LNIND
2007 SC 1071] : AIR 2007 SC 3215 [LNIND 2007 SC 1071] : 2007 Cr LJ 4690 , one blow with a
small stick, section 304, Part II attracted.
130. Sarjug Prasad, AIR 1959 Pat 66 .
131. State of UP v Jodha Singh, AIR 1989 SC 1822 : (1989) 3 SCC 465 : 1989 Cr LJ 2113 . See
also Surender Kumar v Union Territory, Chandigarh, AIR 1989 SC 1094 [LNIND 1989 SC 140] :
1989 Cr LJ 883 , where there was no evidence of acting with cruelty following a quarrel,
sentence under section 304, Part I was considered appropriate; V Sreedharan v State of Kerala,
AIR 1992 SC 754 : 1992 Cr LJ 1701 , where the sudden impulse was held not to have ended
simply because the accused chased the deceased for some distance before giving fatal blow.
132. State of Karnataka v Shivalingaiah, AIR 1988 SC 115 [LNIND 2012 DEL 2078] : 1988 Cr LJ
394 : 1988 SCC (Cr) 881. State of Maharashtra v Suresh, 1989 Cr LJ 1709 (Bom), heat and
passion on cattle grazing leading to one blow on the head with a light stick, the deceased fell
down, blow not repeated, death, punished under section 325 with RI for one year and fine of Rs.
2000. Vadivelu, 1989 Cr LJ 2248 (Mad), causing injury with wooden frame endangering life and
resulting in death, guilty under section 326, not section 302. Karan Singh v State, 1988 Cr LJ 315
(Del), death caused in sudden quarrel, conviction under section 304, Part II. Ramanbhai v State
of Gujarat, 1988 Cr LJ 982 (Guj), quarrel at a bus-stop for Rs. 5/-, moved towards a bridge where
as a result of pushing one fell and died, conviction under section 304, Part II.
133. Pawan Singh v State of Punjab, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 609 (P&H). Thankachan v State of Kerala,
(2007) 14 SCC 501 [LNIND 2007 SC 1325] : AIR 2008 SC 406 [LNIND 2007 SC 1325] , one of the
accused dragged the victim out of his home, the latter picked up a soda bottle, the accused also
lifted a bottle from a shop and struck him on the head, the victim also hit back with the bottle in
his hand, on this the accused exhorted his companions to carry further the attack with the result
the victim died with multiple injuries. Ten years' imprisonment awarded under section 304, Part
I. Rakesh v State of MP, (2007) 14 SCC 504 [LNIND 2008 SC 298] : AIR 2008 SC 1229 [LNIND
2008 SC 298] : 2008 Cr LJ 1646 , comparison of requirements of sections 1 and 4.
134. Balwant Ram v State of Rajasthan, 1995 Cr LJ 3856 (Raj).
135. Baleshwar Mahto v State of Bihar, AIR 2017 SC 873 [LNINDU 2017 SC 8] .
136. Kikar Singh v State of Rajasthan, 1993 Cr LJ 3255 : AIR 1993 SC 2426 [LNIND 1993 SC 456]
: (1993) 4 SCC 238 [LNIND 1993 SC 456] . Kudesh Mondal v State of WB, (2007) 8 SCC 578
[LNIND 2007 SC 1043] : AIR 2007 SC 3228 [LNIND 2007 SC 1043] , a passerby started inquiring
into a killing incident originating over a trivial matter. He was dragged by one and struck a fatal
blow by the other. The court applied this exception. Conviction under section 304, Part I. Salim
Sahab v State of MP, (2007) 1 SCC 699 [LNIND 2006 SC 1089] : (2007) 103 Cut LT 531, another
similar death caused in a quarrel, conviction under section 304, Part II, seven years RI. Vadla
Chandraiah v State of AP, (2006) 13 SCC 587 [LNIND 2006 SC 1103] : 2007 Cr LJ 770 , quarrel
between fruit vendor and a police constable for not paying for fruits consumed. Constable
attacked him with his service weapon to death. Punishment under section 304, Part II. Pappu v
State of MP, 2006 Cr LJ 3640 , murder as a result of a single lathi blow in a sudden quarrel, the
accused was not armed with any weapon. Conviction under section 304, Part II, Pulicheria
Nagaraju v State of AP, 2006 Cr LJ 3899 , another similar case with this observation that a single
blow injury resulting in death is not a ground in itself for holding that the case would come
under section 304 and not under section 302. Khambam Raja Reddy v Public Prosecutor, HC,
Andhra, 2006 Cr LJ 4652 , allegation that on exhortation of the co-accused, the accused picked
up a big stone piece and threw it on the head of the deceased. This could not be true because
he was suffering from polio and could not have picked up the stone. His conviction was set
aside.
137. Suresh Kumar v State of HP, (2008) 13 SCC 459 [LNIND 2008 SC 766] : AIR 2008 SC 1973
[LNIND 2008 SC 766] : 2008 Cr LJ 2247 . Bengaru Venkata Rao v State of AP, (2008) 9 SCC 707
[LNIND 2008 SC 1585] : 2008 Cr LJ 4353 .
138. Anil v State of Haryana, (2007) 10 SCC 274 [LNIND 2007 SC 629] : 2007 Cr LJ 4294 .
139. Bhagwan Munjaji, 1979 Cr LJ 49 (SC).
140. Prabhu v State of UP, AIR 1991 SC 1069 : 1991 Cr LJ 1373 . Single assault attributed to
each of the accused in the course of sudden quarrel in heat of passion, Exception 4 to section
300 attracted, conviction altered from section 300 to section 304, Part II, Subodh Behera v State
of Orissa, 1996 Cr LJ 168 (Ori). The accused, seeing his father being beaten by the deceased,
caused death of the assailant by inflicting injuries on his head in a heat of passion but the
accused did not act in a cruel or unreasonable manner, held Exception 4 to section 300
attracted, the offence covered under section 304, Part I, State of MP v Mohandas, 1992 Cr LJ
101 (MP). The accused brother caused a single injury without pre-meditation in a sudden fight
and in heat of passion to his brother which proved fatal, he neither took undue advantage nor
acted in a cruel manner, held Exception 4 to section 300 attracted, liable to be punished under
section 304, Part I and not under section 302. Suraj Mal v State of Punjab, AIR 1992 SC 559 :
1992 Cr LJ 520 : 1993 Supp (1) SCC 639 . The accused, over a trivial matter of the next day of
Holi festival and without any pre-meditation or any enmity with the victim, suddenly inflicted a
single knife blow on his chest which proved fatal, held, the offence fell within Exception 4 of
section 300, punishable under section 304, Part I, not under section 302. Prakash v State of
Rajasthan, 1994 Cr LJ 3019 (Raj). See also Pitchaimani v State of T.N., 1994 Cr LJ 2606 (Mad),
wordy duel, sudden quarrel, no pre-meditation, culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
141. Sukhbir Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2002 SC 1168 [LNIND 2002 SC 134] ; Bajjappa v State
of Karnataka, 1999 Cr LJ 958 (Kant), altercation resulting in violent assault at the spur of
moment. The accused was an agriculturist with clean record, had three children, in custody for
considerable period, sentence reduced to five years RI, fine Rs. 1000. Lakhwinder Singh v State of
Punjab, AIR 2003 SC 2577 [LNIND 2002 SC 820] , the accused suffered 19 injuries, two of them
grievous, the prosecution could not say that they did not know such extensive injuries or that
they were self-accused, explanation by the prosecution was necessary, failure led to the
inference that the true genesis and manner of the incident was not disclosed. Ramesh Krishna
Madhusudan Nayar v State of Maharashtra, (2008) 14 SCC 491 [LNIND 2008 SC 18] : (2009) 2
SCC Cri 759 : AIR 2008 SC 927 [LNIND 2008 SC 18] : 2008 Cr LJ 1023 , two blows with a piece of
wood inflicted after quarrel for several hours about putting off the light of the staff room at
night. Exception 4 attracted. Arumugan v State, (2008) 115 SCC 490 : AIR 2009 SC 331 [LNIND
2008 SC 1994] , fight over panchayat election, the victim dragged out from his home, exchange
of hot words, blows inflicted by the accused and his companions. Exception attracted. Raghbir
Singh v State of Haryana, (2008) 16 SCC 33 [LNIND 2008 SC 2228] : AIR 2009 SC 223 : (2009) 73
AIC 93 , lathi blows in the course of a sudden quarrel, exception applied. Parkash Chand v State
of HP, (2004) 11 SCC 381 [LNIND 2004 SC 759] : AIR 2004 SC 4496 [LNIND 2004 SC 759] , one
brother's dogs entered the kitchen of the other, the latter protested, heated altercation ensued,
one went into his room, came out with a gun, shot at the other from a distance of 35 feet, death
ensued. Exception applied. Preetam Singh v State of Rajasthan, (2003) 12 SCC 594 , there being
a background to the struggle, the court did not regard the fight to be sudden. Hence, the
exception not attracted. State of Maharashtra v Manjurrya, (2003) 12 SCC 787 , the attacking
party came fully prepared and caused death as in an organised manner, no feature of a sudden
fight. Sachchey Lal Tiwari v State of UP, (2004) 11 SCC 410 [LNIND 2004 SC 1041] : AIR 2004 SC
5039 [LNIND 2004 SC 1041] , dividing line between two fields dismissed by the attacking party,
fired pistol shots at the opponent killing his two sons. The exception not applicable. Umesh Jha
v State of Bihar, (2004) 12 SCC 329 , genesis in lands dispute, but murder pre-meditated,
Exception 4 not applicable.
142. Sikandar v State (Delhi) Admn, AIR 1999 SC 1406 [LNIND 1999 SC 351] : 1999 Cr LJ 2098 .
Hari Shankar v State of Rajasthan, AIR 1999 SC 2629 : 1999 Cr LJ 2902 , exchange of hard words,
burning kerosene stove wick thrown, knowledge of likely death, conviction under section 304.
143. Mahesh Balmiki v State of MP, 1999 Cr LJ 4310 : AIR 1999 SC 3338 [LNIND 1999 SC 755] ;
Rameshraya v State of MP, AIR 2001 SC 1229 : 2001 Cr LJ 1452 (SC). Sudden fight, but murder
committed in most brutal manner conviction under section 302. Abdul Kader v State of Gujarat,
1999 Cr LJ 5027 (Guj), police on duty during Muslim festivities tried to prevent gambling, the
accused, who was friendly with gamblers, gave one knife injury to a police constable resulting in
death. The court noted that there was no premeditation, the act was the result of heat of
passion, no undue advantage, Exception 4 attracted, conviction under section 304, Part II, seven
years' imprisonment. Resham Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2002 SC 2625 : 2002 Cr LJ 3506 , fight
from both sides, Exception 4 attracted, conviction under section 304, Part II. Naresh Janimal
Lohana v State, 1998 Cr LJ 3574 (Guj), domestic quarrel between parties on question of
throwing away some mango waste, male members came out and started taking part in the
sudden fight, the accused gave one blow in the scuffle by wielding a knife in the sudden heat of
passion. No premeditation. Exception 4 attracted. Pawan Kumar v State, 1997 Cr LJ 3631 (P&H),
sudden quarrel over snatching of newspaper, single knife blow, acting at the spur of moment
without premeditation, Exception 4 attracted, conviction under section 304, Part II. Lekh Raj v
State, 1997 Cr LJ 3663 (HP), accused entered into victim's house and inflicted knife blows on
vital parts, conviction under section 302, Exception 4 not attracted. Surinder Kumar v State, 1997
Cr LJ 2872 (P&H), during an altercation, the accused pushed the victim, whose head dashed
against the wall causing death. The accused given benefit of the exception, conviction under
section 304, Part I. Uday Singh v State of UP, AIR 2002 SC 3143 [LNIND 2002 SC 545] , sudden
fight between the accused persons and their victim, both unarmed, both accused held their
victim by his neck with pressure that he died, neither knew about the pressure being put by the
other, no common intention to cause death, only knowledge, conviction under section 304, Part
II. Bala Baine Linga Raju v State of AP, (2009) 6 SCC 706 [LNIND 2009 SC 1104] : (2009) 3 SCC Cr
13 : 2009 Cr LJ 3426 , in the absence of appeal by state, the Supreme Court did not enhance the
sentence to that for murder despite the fact that the case was that of murder and not coming
under the exception.
144. Sukhdev v State of Punjab, (2007) 16 SCC 364 . The court considered cases relating to
importance of premeditation and undue or unfair advantage. Rakesh v State of MP, (2007) 14
SCC 504 [LNIND 2008 SC 298] : AIR 2008 SC 1229 [LNIND 2008 SC 298] : 2008 Cr LJ 646 , one
of them assaulted their victim with knife, three others gave him kicks and fists blows. The trial
court convicted the main accused under section 302 and also others under sections 302/34.
The High Court maintained the conviction of main accused under section 302 and convicted
others under sections 326/34. The Supreme Court convicted and punished all of them under
sections 304/34, Part I, 10 years. Gurdev Raj v State of Punjab, (2007) 13 SCC 380 [LNIND 2007
SC 1180] : 2008 Cr LJ 382 , conviction altered from section 302 to section 304, Part I. Shambhao
Singh v State of Rajasthan, (2008) 11 SCC 637 [LNIND 2008 SC 1492] : AIR 2008 SC 3200 [LNIND
2008 SC 1492] , quarrel in land dispute, stabbing, one died, other family members injured,
conviction under section 304, Part 1, 10 years, would meet the ends of justice. Baij Nath v State
of UP, (2008) 11 SCC 738 [LNIND 2008 SC 1374] , one lathi blow on head, causing, fracture and
death, seven years under section 304, Part I.
145. Sada Ram v State of Haryana, (2006) 13 SCC 528 . Sandhya Jadhav v State of Maharashtra,
2006 Cr LJ 2111 SC, landlord demanded rent, the tenant (accused) assaulted him, nephew of
landlord, who tried to intervene was given a knife blow causing death, conviction altered to
section 304, Part II from section 302.
146. Suresh Chandra v State of UP, 2005 Cr LJ 3449 : AIR 2005 SC 9 [LNIND 2004 SC 1110] :
(2005) 1 SCC 122 [LNIND 2004 SC 1110] .
147. Santokh Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2009 SC 1923 [LNIND 2009 SC 328] : (2009) 11 SCC
197 [LNIND 2009 SC 328] ; Arumugam v State Rep by Inspector of Police TN, AIR 2009 SC 331
[LNIND 2008 SC 1994] : (2008) 15 SCC 590 [LNIND 2008 SC 1994] ; D Sailu v State of AP, AIR
2008 SC 505 [LNIND 2007 SC 1347] : (2007) 14 SCC 397 [LNIND 2007 SC 1347] .
148. Sridhar Bhuyan v State of Orissa, (2004) 11 SCC 395 [LNIND 2004 SC 758] : AIR 2004 SC
4100 [LNIND 2004 SC 758] : 2004 Cr LJ 3875 .
149. Note M, p 145.
150. Nayamuddin, (1891) 18 Cal 484 (FB).
151. Ambalathil, AIR 1956 Mad 97 .
152. Halliday, (1889) 61 LT 701 , 702.
153. Towers, (1874) 12 Cox 530, 533.
154. Lal Bahadur v State (NCT of Delhi), (2013) 4 SCC 557 [LNIND 2014 SC 553] ; 2013 Cr LJ
2205 : 2013 (2) SCC (Cr) 516.
155. Adu Shikdar, (1885) 11Cal 635; Bhairon Lal, (1952) 2 Raj 669 ; Ram Chandra v State, AIR
1957 SC 381 : 1957 Cr LJ 559 .
156. Rama Nand, 1981 Cr LJ 298 : AIR 1981 SC 738 [LNIND 1981 SC 5] . See further Manguli
Devi v State of Orissa, AIR 1989 SC 483 : 1989 Cr LJ 823 : 1989 Supp (1) SCC 161 , where dead
body was discovered in decomposed state and no wounds were visible yet the conviction of the
widow of the deceased on the basis of her confession was sustained; Rama Nand v State of UP,
AIR 1981 SC 738 [LNIND 1981 SC 5] : (1981) 2 SCR 444 [LNIND 1981 SC 5] : 1981 Cr LJ 298 :
1981 Mad LJ (Cr) 241. Amar Layek v State of WB, 1988 Cr LJ 1293 (Cal), only skeleton of bones
and other personal articles recovered on lead given by accused, held guilty of murder. Hari
Kishan v State of Haryana, 1990 Cr LJ 385 (P&H), good evidence, though corpus delecti not
traceable. But see Bhupendra Singh v State of UP, AIR 1991 SC 1083 [LNIND 1991 SC 151] : 1991
Cr LJ 1337 : (1991) 2 SCC 750 [LNIND 1991 SC 151] , where the body of the deceased was burnt
and pieces of bones which were recovered were not sufficient to establish the age, sex or
identity. Conviction even under section 201 was set aside. Sevaka Perumal v State of TN, AIR
1991 SC 1463 [LNIND 1991 SC 269] : 1991 Cr LJ 1845 , murder charge can be established by
evidence, though dead body may not be traceable. Arun Kumar v State of UP, 1989 Cr LJ 1460 :
AIR 1989 SC 1445 : 1989 Supp (2) 332 , dead body of victim of rape not traceable, conviction
under section 366 justified.
157. Rishipal v State of Uttarakhand, 2013 Cr LJ 1534 (SC) : 2013 AIR (SCW) 1167; Lakshmi v
State of UP, 2002 (7) SCC 198 [LNIND 2002 SC 534] ; State of Karnataka v MV Mahesh, 2003 (3)
SCC 353 [LNIND 2003 SC 270] .
158. Jitender Kumar v State of Haryana, 2012 Cr LJ 3085 : AIR 2012 SC 2488 [LNIND 2012 SC
331] : (2012) 6 SCC 204 [LNINDORD 2012 SC 412] ; The state of the contents of the stomach
found at the time of medical examination is not a safe guide for determining the time of the
occurrence because that would be a matter of speculation, in the absence of reliable evidence
on the question as to when the deceased had his last meal and what that meal consisted of.
Masjit Tato Rawool v State of Maharashtra, (1971) SCC (Cr) 732; Gopal Singh v State of UP, AIR
1979 SC 1932 ; Sheo Darshan v State of UP, (1972) SCC (Cr) 394. [The presence of faecal matter
in the intestines is not conclusive, as the deceased might be suffering from constipation. Where
there is positive direct evidence about the time of occurrence, it is not open to the court to
speculate about the time of occurrence by the presence of faecal matter in the intestines; Sheo
Dershan v State of UP, (1972) SCC (Cr) 394. The question of time of death of the victim should
not be decided only by taking into consideration the state of food in the stomach. That may be a
factor which should be considered along with other evidence, but that fact alone cannot be
decisive; R Prakash v State of UP, (1969) 1 SCC 48 . Also see Shivappa v State of Karnataka,
(1995) 2 SCC 76 [LNIND 1994 SC 1111] ; Jabbar Singh v State of Rajasthan, (1994) SCC (Cr)
1745. Bijendra Bhagat v State of Uttarakhand, 2015 Cr LJ 3150 , the injuries suffered by the
deceased are incised wounds and one fire arm injury. However, none of the injuries on the
person of the deceased could be attributed to the lathi which was supposedly in the hands of
the appellant. Benefit of doubt given.
159. Raju v State of Chhatisgarh, 2014 Cr LJ 4425 : 2014 (9) SCJ 453 [LNINDORD 2014 SC
19031] .
160. Deepa v State of Haryana, 2015 Cr LJ 2508 .
161. Jagtar Singh v State of Haryana, 2015 Cr LJ 3418 .
162. Alagarsamy v State by DSP, 2010 Cr LJ 29 : AIR 2010 SC 849 [LNIND 2009 SC 1914] . See
also Arun Kumar Sharma v State of Bihar, (2010) 1 SCC 108 [LNIND 2009 SC 1866] : 2010 Cr LJ
428 , where FIR was sent to the Magistrate after five days.
163. Awadesh Kumar Shukla v State of UP, 2015 (7) ADJ 530 [LNIND 2015 ALL 190] : 2015 (6)
ALJ 665 (All).
164. Dilawar Singh v State of Haryana, 2014 Cr LJ 4844 : (2015) 1 SCC 737 [LNIND 2014 SC 823]
.
165. State of Rajasthan v Chandgi Ram, 2014 Cr LJ 4571 : 2014 (10) Scale 352 [LNIND 2014 SC
811] .
166. Sudarshan v State of Maharashtra, 2014 Cr LJ 3232 : 2015 (5) SCJ 358 . See also State of
Karnataka v Sateesh, 2015 Cr LJ 3427 .
167. Rishipal v State of Uttarakhand, 2013 Cr LJ 1534 (SC) : 2013 AIR (SCW) 1167; Sukhram v
State of Maharashtra, 2007 (7) SCC 502 [LNIND 2007 SC 969] ; Sunil Clifford Daniel (Dr) v State of
Punjab, 2012 (8) Scale 670 [LNIND 2012 SC 551] , Pannayar v State of TN by Inspector of Police,
2009 (9) SCC 152 [LNIND 2009 SC 1687] .
168. Sanaulla Khan v State of Bihar, (2013) 3 SCC 52 [LNIND 2013 SC 120] : 2013 Cr LJ 1527 ;
Ujjagar Singh v State of Punjab, 2007 (13) SCC 90 [LNIND 2007 SC 1486] .
169. Gosu Jairami Reddy v State of AP, AIR 2011 SC 3147 [LNIND 2011 SC 2666] : 2011 Cr LJ
4387 : (2011) 11 SCC 766 [LNIND 2011 SC 2666] ; Abu Thakir v State, (2010) 5 SCC 91 [LNIND
2010 SC 366] : AIR 2010 SC 2119 [LNIND 2010 SC 366] : 2010 Cr LJ 2840 .
170. Ashok Rai v State of UP, 2014 Cr LJ 3085 : 2014 (10) SCJ 729 [LNINDU 2014 SC 21] .
171. Rambraksh v State of Chhattisgarh, 2016 Cr LJ 2939 : 2016 (5) SCJ 600 ; Dharam Deo
Yadav v State of UP, 2014 Cr LJ 2371 : 2014 (2) ALT (Cr) 322 (SC).
172. Rishipal v State of Uttarakhand, 2013 Cr LJ 1534 (SC) : 2013 AIR (SCW) 1167; Mohibur
Rahman v State of Assam, 2002 (6) SCC 715 ; in Arjun Marik v State of Bihar, 1994 Supp (2) SCC
372 , Supreme Court reiterated that the solitary circumstance of the accused and victim being
last seen will not complete the chain of circumstances for the Court to record a finding that it is
consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. No conviction on that basis
alone can, therefore, be founded. So also in Godabarish Mishra v Kuntala Mishra, 1996 (11) SCC
264 [LNIND 1996 SC 1719] , the Supreme Court declared that the theory of last seen together is
not of universal application and may not always be sufficient to sustain a conviction unless
supported by other links in the chain of circumstances; State of Goa v Sanjay Thakran, 2007 (3)
SCC 755 [LNIND 2007 SC 274] ; Bodh Raj @ Bodha v State of Jammu and Kashmir, 2002 (8) SCC
45 [LNIND 2002 SC 539] ; Jaswant Gir v State of Punjab, 2005 (12) SCC 438 ; see Manthuri Laxmi
Narasaiah v State of AP, 2012 Cr LJ 2172 : AIR 2011 SC (Supp) 73, in which the evidence of last
seen rejected by the Supreme Court.
173. Also see Shyamal Ghosh v State of WB, (2012) 7 SCC 646 [LNIND 2012 SC 397] : 2012 Cr
LJ 3825 : AIR 2012 SC 3539 [LNIND 2012 SC 397] ; Inspector of Police TN v John David, (2011) 5
SCC 509 [LNIND 2011 SC 441] : 2011 Cr LJ 3366 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 647 , 'last seen alive theory
accepted'. See also Mannan v State of Bihar, (2011) 5 SCC 317 [LNIND 2011 SC 440] : 2011 Cr
LJ 3380 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 626 .
174. Arabindra Mukherjee v State of WB, 2012 AIR (SCW) 1032 : 2012 Cr LJ 1207 .
175. State Through CBI v Mahender Singh Dahiya, (2011) 3 SCC 109 [LNIND 2011 SC 114] : AIR
2011 SC 1017 [LNIND 2011 SC 114] : 2011 Cr LJ 2177 , last seen evidence would not always
mean that the accused had killed the deceased.
176. C Perumal v Rajasekaran, 2012 AIR (SCW) 3641 : 2012 Cr LJ 3491 .
177. Rambraksh v State of Chhattisgarh, 2016 Cr LJ 2939 : 2016 (5) SCJ 600 .
178. Kanhaiya Lal v State of Rajasthan, 2014 Cr LJ 1950 : 2014 (4) WLN 299 (SC).
179. Mahavir Singh v State of Haryana, 2014 Cr LJ 3228 : 2014 (7) Scale 477 .
180. Surender Prashad v State, (2014) 209 DLT 461 : 2014 VI AD (Del) 234.
181. Bikau Pandey v State of Bihar, AIR 2004 SC 997 [LNIND 2003 SC 1027] : (2003) 12 SCC 616
[LNIND 2003 SC 1027] ; Dalbir Singh v State of Haryana, AIR 2008 SC 2389 [LNIND 2008 SC
1218] : (2008) 11 SCC 425 [LNIND 2008 SC 1218] ; Nishan Singh v State of Punjab, AIR 2008 SC
1661 [LNIND 2008 SC 2718] : (2008) 17 SCC 505 [LNIND 2008 SC 2718] . See also Balraje v
State of Maharashtra, (2010) 6 SCC 673 [LNIND 2010 SC 487] : 2010 Cr LJ 3443 ; Satvir v State of
UP, AIR 2009 SC 1741 [LNIND 2009 SC 124] : 2009 Cr LJ 1586 : (2009) 4 SCC 289 [LNIND 2009
SC 124] .
182. Mukesh v State for NCT of Delhi, 2017 (5) Scale 506 .