Threat of injury to public servant.
Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public servant, or to any person in whom
he believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of inducing that
public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected with the
exercise of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
State Amendment
Andhra Pradesh.— In Andhra Pradesh offence under section 189 is cognizable.
[Vide A.P.G.O. Ms. No. 732, dated 5th December, 1991].
COMMENT—
Under this section there must be a threat of injury either to the public servant or to any
one in whom the accused believes the public servant to be interested. What the section
deals with are menaces which would have a tendency to induce the public servant to
alter his action. See section 503 which defines criminal intimidation and applies in all
cases. This section deals with criminal intimidation of a public servant. Threats of
violence to a public servant who accepted bribe money but did not do the promised
work are not covered by this section. A public servant deserves protection, since in the
performance of his duties, he is likely to cause disappointment to many and invite their
wrath. That is why under sections 189 and 353 and various other sections of the IPC,
1860, a public servant is strongly protected and punishment for offences against him is
made deterrent. However if a public servant has gone astray and indulged in
malpractices, more especially by way of taking bribe, he would necessarily become
subject to public criticism and private accountability. What appears then at the
forefront is not the performance of duty by the public servant, but the non-performance
of some contract dehors the normal functions of the public servant. If that illegal
contract gives rise to any act of violence at any stage, such acts cannot constitute by
any stretch of imagination acts contemplated and punished under sections 353 and
189, IPC, 1860.128.
Where workers of Communist Party (Marxist) went to a police station to protest
against the arrest of their party workers and in the process asked the police-officer to
release them on threat of dire consequences, it was held that the accused had
committed an offence under this section.129. By a notification under section 10 of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932, the State Government can make this section a
cognizable offence for a specified area.
128. Duraikhannu v State of TN, 1987 Cr LJ 1461 (Mad); Mrityunjoy Das v State, 1987 Cr LJ 909
(Cal).
129. De Cruz, (1884) 8 Mad 140.