Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent
distribution among creditors.
Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or
transfer or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration,
any property,1 intending thereby to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will
thereby prevent, the distribution of that property according to law among his creditors
or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT—
This and the three following sections deal with fraudulent conveyances referred to in
section 53 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and the Presidency- towns and
Provincial Insolvency Acts.
This section specially refers to frauds connected with insolvency. The offence under it
consists in a dishonest disposition of property with intent to cause wrongful loss to the
creditors. It will cover benami transactions in fraud of creditors. It will apply to property
both movable and immovable.
Compare sections 205–210 with sections 421–424 as they are similar in character.
The former sections deal with fraud on Courts, the latter, with fraud on creditors.
[s 421.1] Ingredients.—
To prove an offence under this section the prosecution must show:—
1. That the accused removed, concealed or delivered the property or that he transferred
it or caused it to be transferred to someone.
2. That such transfer was without adequate consideration.
3. That the accused thereby intended to prevent or knew that he was thereby likely to
prevent the distribution of that property according to law among his creditors or
creditors of another person.
4. That he acted dishonestly and fraudulently.593.
1. 'Property'.—This word includes a chose in action. The right to cut trees under an
agreement for the purpose of making charcoal from wood is movable property.594.
593. Ramautar Chaukhany, 1982 Cr LJ 2266 (Gau).
594. Manchersha v Ismail, (1935) 60 Bom 706, 38 Bom LR 168.