Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.
Nothing is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose
benefit it is done in good faith, even without that person's consent, if the
circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify consent, or if
that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in
lawful charge of him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing
to be done with benefit: Provided—
Provisos.
First.—That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or
the attempting to cause death;
Secondly.—That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the
person doing it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the
preventing of death or grievous hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or
infirmity;
Thirdly.—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of hurt, or
to the attempting to cause hurt, for any purpose other than the preventing of
death or hurt;
Fourthly.—That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to
the committing of which offence it would not extend.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z
requires to be trepanned. A, not intending Z's death, but in good faith, for Z's
benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for
himself. A has committed no offence.
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the
shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, and in good faith intending Z's
benefit. A's ball gives Z a mortal wound. A has committed no offence.
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal
unless an operation be immediately performed. There is no time to apply to
the child's guardian. A performs the operation in spite of the entreaties of
the child, intending, in good faith, the child's benefit. A has committed no
offence.
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a
blanket. A drops the child from the house-top, knowing it to be likely that the
fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the child, and intending, in
good faith, the child's benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A
has committed no offence.
Explanation.—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of
sections 88, 89 and 92.
COMMENT.—
Acts done in good faith.—This section is designed to meet those cases which do not
come either under section 88 or under section 89. The principal object of sections 88,
89 and 92 is protection of medical practitioners. Illustrations (a) and (b) exemplify
cases in which it is impossible to give consent; illustrations (c) and (d), where legal
capacity to consent is wanting.
The author of the Code observes:
There yet remains a kindred class of cases which are by no means of rare occurrence. For
example, a person falls down in an apoplectic fit. Bleeding alone can save him, and he is
unable to signify his consent to be bled. The surgeon who bleeds him commits an act falling
under the definition of an offence. The surgeon is not the patient's guardian, and has no
authority from any such guardian, yet it is evident that the surgeon ought not to be
punished. Again, a house is on fire. A person snatches up a child too young to understand
the danger, and flings it from the house-top, with a faint hope that it may be caught on a
blanket below, but with the knowledge that it is highly probable that it will be dashed to
pieces. Here, though the child may be killed by the fall though the person who threw it down
knew that it would very probably be killed, and though he was not the child's parent or
guardian, he ought not to be punished.
In these examples there is what may be called a temporary guardianship justified by the
exigency of the case and by the humanity of the motive. This temporary guardianship bears
a considerable analogy to that temporary magistracy with which the law invests every
person who is present when a great crime is committed, or when the public peace is
concerned. To acts done in the exercise of this temporary guardianship, we extend by
clause 72 a protection very similar to that which we have given to the acts of regular
guardians.244.
This section speaks of 'hurt', whereas section 89 speaks of 'grievous hurt', otherwise
the terminology of both the sections is almost identical.
1. Shankar Narayan Bhadolkar v State of Maharashtra, AIR 2004 SC 1966 [LNIND 2004 SC 1370] :
2004 Cr LJ 1778 : (2005) 9 SCC 71 [LNIND 2004 SC 1370] .
2. The Indian Evidence Act, I of 1872, section 105.
3. Musammat Anandi, (1923) 45 All 329 ; Babulal, 1960 Cr LJ 437 (All).
4. A K Chaudhary v State of Gujarat, 2006 Cr LJ 726 (Guj).
5. A K Chaudhary v State of Gujarat, 2006 Cr LJ 726 (Guj).
244. The Works of Lord Macaulay- 'On the Chapter of General Exceptions', Note B.