Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.
Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of any 1167.[person under the
age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be employed or
used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any
unlawful and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any
age be] employed or used for any purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
1168.[Explanation I.—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who
buys, hires or otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen
years shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of
such female with the intent that she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution.
Explanation II.—"Illicit intercourse" has the same meaning as in section 372.
COMMENT.—
This section and section 372 conjointly punish both the giver as well as the receiver of
a person under the age of eighteen years for an immoral purpose. Both the sections
relate to the same subject-matter. The former contemplates an offence committed by
the person who sells, or lets to hire, or otherwise disposes of any person under the age
of eighteen years, with the requisite intent or knowledge. The latter relates to the case
of the person who buys, hires, or otherwise obtains possession of any person under the
age of eighteen. The first section strikes at any bargain of the nature contemplated by
it, whoever may be the party who sells or lets the person, even though it should be the
father or mother or lawful guardian. The second strikes at the bawds, keepers of
brothels and all others who fatten on the profits arising from the general prostitution of
girls.
[s 373.1] Ingredients.—
This section requires—
1. Buying, hiring or otherwise obtaining possession of a person.
2. The person should be under the age of eighteen years.
3. The buying, hiring, or otherwise obtaining possession must be with intent or
knowledge of likelihood that the person shall at any age be employed or used for
(i) prostitution, or
(ii) illicit intercourse, or
(iii) any unlawful and immoral purpose.
[s 373.2] Explanation I.—
In order that the presumption under this Explanation should take effect, it is necessary
that the accused should be a prostitute or should be keeping or managing a brothel at
the time he or she obtains possession of a girl.1169.
[s 373.3] 'Person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such person
shall at any age be employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit
intercourse with any person, etc.'—
The age-limit was raised to 18 years by Act V of 1924.
The introduction of the words 'at any age' indicates that the offence is committed even
if the employment of the person for immoral purpose is to take place after the
completion of eighteen years, that is, at any time.
The words 'illicit intercourse' are explained in Explanation 2 to section 372. See
comment on section 372.
1167. Subs. by Act 18 of 1924, sec. 2, for certain words.
1168. Ins. by Act 18 of 1924, sec. 4.
1169. Banubai Irani, (1942) 45 Bom LR 281 (FB).