Punishment for defamation.
Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT.—
The essence of the offence of defamation consists in its tendency to cause that
description of pain which is felt by a person who knows himself to be the object of the
unfavourable sentiments of his fellow-creatures, and those inconveniences to which a
person who is the object of such unfavourable sentiments is exposed.6.
[s 500.1] Ingredients.—
The section requires three essentials:—
1. Making or publishing any imputation concerning any person.
2. Such imputation must have been made by
(a) words, either spoken or intended to be read; or
(b) signs; or
(c) visible representations.
3. Such imputation must have been made with the intention of harming or with
knowledge or reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerning
whom it is made.7. It is clear that intention to cause harm is the most essential sine
qua non for an offence under section 499, IPC, 1860. An offence punishable under
section 500, IPC, 1860 requires blameworthy mind and is not a statutory offence
requiring any mens rea.8.
1. 'Makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person'.—Everyone who
composes, dictates, writes or in any way contributes to the making of a libel, is the
maker of the libel. If one dictates, and another writes, both are guilty of making it, for he
shows his approbation of what he writes. So, if one repeats, another writes a libel, and
a third approved what is written they are all makers of it, as all who concur and assent
to the doing of an unlawful act are guilty; and murdering a man's reputation by a libel
may be compared to murdering a man's person, in which all who are present and
encourage the act are guilty, though the wound was given by one only.9. The mechanic
or the compositor of the Press does neither 'make nor publish' the matter that may be
impugned as defamatory.10. Intention on the part of the accused to harm the
reputation or the knowledge or reasonable belief that an imputation will harm the
reputation of the person concerned being an essential ingredient of the offence of
defamation, the Chairman of a Company owning the newspaper in which the offending
news item is published cannot be held liable unless it is shown that he was somehow
concerned with the publication of the defamatory news item. Under section 7 of the
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 a presumption regarding awareness of the
contents of a newspaper can be raised only against the Editor whose name appears on
the copy of the newspaper and no other Editors like the News Editor or Resident Editor
whose names do not appear in the declaration printed on the copy of the newspaper.11.
[s 500.2] 'Publishes'.—
The defamatory matter must be published, that is, communicated to some person
other than the person about whom it is addressed, e.g., dictating a letter to a clerk is
publication.12. Imputations in a charge sheet which is sent to the employee himself
does not amount to a publication.13. But where there is a duty which forms the ground
of privileged occasion, the person exercising the privilege may communicate matters
to a third person in the ordinary course of business. A solicitor who dictates to his clerk
a letter containing defamatory statements regarding a person is not liable for
defamation.14. Where the complainant's Advocate sent a notice to a party whose
Advocate dictated a reply to his steno containing defamatory remarks and the same
was sent to the complainant's Advocate, the Kerala High Court held that this did not
amount to any publication.15.
Communicating defamatory matter only to the person defamed is not publication.16.
The action of a person who sent to a public officer by post, in a closed cover, a notice
containing imputations on the character of the recipient but which was not
communicated by the accused to any third person was held to be not such a 'making'
or 'publishing' of the matter complained of as to constitute this offence.17. A notice
under a Municipal Act was issued by the President of the Municipal Committee to a
certain person, who sent a reply containing defamatory allegations against the
President. This reply was put on the official file by the President and it was read by the
members of the Committee. It was held that there was publication of the defamation.
The placing of the reply on the official file was not a gratuitous or voluntary act on the
part of the President but it was his duty to do so, and the accused knew or must have
known that the contents of his reply would be necessarily communicated to the
members of the Committee.18.
Where the alleged defamatory words were sent to the complainant by registered post, it
was held that there was no publication. There was absence of one of the necessary
ingredients of the offence, namely publication. The complaint was liable to be
quashed.19.
Defamatory matter written on a postcard20. or printed on papers distributed or
broadcast,21. constitutes publication. So is the filing in a Court of a petition containing
defamatory matter concerning a person with the intention that it should be read by
other persons.22. When a person presents a defamatory petition to a superior public
officer, who, in the ordinary course of official routine, sends it to some subordinate
officer for inquiry, there is a publication of the letter at the place where he may receive
it, and publication for which the original writer may prima facie be held responsible,
whether or not he expressly asks for an inquiry.23. Communication to a husband or wife
of a charge against the wife or husband is publication,24. but uttering of a libel by a
husband to his wife is not, as in England they are one in the eye of the law.25.
Where a libel is printed, the sale of each copy is a distinct publication and a fresh
offence; and conviction or acquittal on an indictment for publishing one copy will be no
bar to an indictment for publishing another copy.26.
The person who publishes the imputation need not necessarily be the author of the
imputation. The person who publishes and the person who makes an imputation are
alike guilty.27.
[s 500.3] General Statement.—
In order to constitute offence of defamation the words, signs, imputation made by
accused must either be intended to harm the reputation of a particular person or the
accused must reasonably know that his/her conduct could cause such harm. Where
the appellant's statement published in news magazine was a rather general
endorsement of pre-marital sex and her remarks were not directed at any individual or
even at a 'company or an association or collection of persons', it was held that it cannot
be construed as an attack on the reputation of anyone in particular.28. Where a
complaint was filed with regard to a statement made by the Gujarat Chief Minister
published in media or newspaper or over television or through internet that ex-Prime
Minister late Hon'ble Shri Jawahar Lal Nehru did nothing for children. The High Court
upheld the rejection of complaint holding that it was only a general statement and
cannot be construed as an attack on reputation of anyone in particular.29.
[s 500.4] Repetition.—
The Code makes no exception in favour of a second or third publication as compared
with the first. If a complaint is properly laid in respect of a publication which is prima
facie defamatory, the Magistrate is bound to take cognizance of the complaint, and
deal with it according to law.30. The publisher of a libel is strictly responsible,
irrespective of the fact whether he is the originator of the libel or is merely repeating
it.31.
[s 500.5] Publication of defamatory matter in newspaper.—
In a case of defamation, only the source of information on which the person accused
has acted and the justification for his so acting, are to be considered. If he has not
taken proper care and acted on gossip against the complainant hereby defamed, he
ought not to escape the consequence on the ground that he has contracted the
incorrect report. The culpability in such cases does not depend upon the
circumstances where he has tried to undo the wrong which he has committed or not
put up on fact he has acted with care or attention or has done so rashly or negligently, it
is no defence in the matter of defamation for the accused to say that he has acted on
the information given to him by another. It is for him to establish that the source on
which he acted is a proper source on which he is entitled and he did with care and
circumspection. Therefore, the editor and publisher are liable for the baseless and false
matter which was published in the journal. Such an irresponsible conduct and attitude
on the part of the editor and publisher cannot be said to be done in good faith.32. In the
matter of defamation the position of newspaper is not in any way different from that of
member of the public in general. The responsibility in either case is the same.33. The
publisher of a newspaper is responsible for defamatory matter published in such paper
whether he knows the contents of such paper or not.34. But it would be a sufficient
answer to a charge of defamation against the editor of a newspaper if he proved that
the libel was published in his absence and without his knowledge and he had in good
faith entrusted the temporary management of the newspaper during his absence to a
competent person.35. The owner of a journal in order to be liable under section 499 has
to have direct responsibility for the publication of the defamatory statement and he
must also have the intention to harm, or knowledge or reason to believe that the
imputation will harm the reputation of person concerned. The owner of a journal qua
has no responsibility under the section.36. The prosecution of the chairman and
managing director of a company owning the newspaper for the publication of
defamatory article in the newspaper by reason of their holding those posts would be
invalid unless their personal involvement in the publication of the article is
established.37.
Where a newspaper carried extracts from a book written on one of the former Prime
Ministers of India containing imputations of corruption, the editor of the newspaper
was liable to be prosecuted. His plea that he was only a publisher and not the author of
the extracts was held to be not tenable. It was alleged that there was a criminal
conspiracy in the matter between the managing editor, resident editor and executing
editor. All of them were liable to be prosecuted.38. A chief editor of a newspaper cannot
say that he is not responsible for selection and publication of matters in the
newspaper. A complaint against the chief editor is maintainable.39.
The sending of a newspaper, containing defamatory matter by post from Calcutta,
where it is published, addressed to a subscriber at Allahabad, is publication of such
defamatory matter at Allahabad.40.
[s 500.6] Liability of Editor.—
From the scheme of the Press and Registration of Books (PRB) Act, it is evident that it
is the Editor who controls the selection of matter that is published. A news item has the
potentiality of bringing doom's day for an individual. The Editor controls the selection of
the matter that is published. Therefore, he has to keep a careful eye on the selection.
Blue-penciling of news articles by anyone other than the Editor is not welcome in a
democratic polity. Editors have to take responsibility of everything they publish and to
maintain the integrity of published record.41.
[s 500.7] Prosecution against CEO of TV Channel.—
In order to constitute offence of defamation under criminal law, section 499, IPC, 1860
contemplates "intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such
imputation will harm reputation of such person" on the part of the accused. In the entire
complaint, the complainant/1st respondent did not allege that the accused, who is
Chief Executive Officer of TV-9 channel, telecast the news item or permitted to re-
telecast the news item with such state of mind (Mens rea). Except as Chief Executive
Officer of the TV news channel, the complainant did not allege any other connection for
the accused with telecasting of the news item. In the absence of any such connection
for the accused with this news item and in the absence of any such mens rea or state
of mind for the accused in relation to this news item, simply because the accused
happened to be Chief Executive Officer or proprietor or partner or managing director of
the TV news channel, no criminal case can lie against him for offence punishable under
section 500, IPC, 1860.42.
[s 500.8] Jurisdiction.—
Where a newspaper containing a defamatory article is printed and published at one
place and is circulated or sold at other places by or on behalf of the accused
responsible for printing and publishing the newspaper, then there would be publication
of the defamatory article in all such places and jurisdictional Magistrate can entertain
the complaint for defamation. It cannot be said that the act of publication comes to an
end as soon as the issue of the newspaper is released at one place. If that newspaper
is despatched by the printer and publisher to other places for being sold or circulated,
the defamatory article gets published at each such place. The mere fact that the
headquarter of a newspaper is based at a particular place or that it is printed and
published at one place, does not necessarily mean that there cannot be publication of
the defamatory article contained in the newspaper at another place. If the defamatory
imputation is made available to public at several places, then the offence is committed
at each such place. Though the first offence may be committed at the place where it is
printed and first published, it gets repeated wherever the newspaper is circulated at
other places.43.
[s 500.9] Apology.—
Where the incriminating news was not published in the newspaper by the editor
knowing or having good reason to believe that such matter was defamatory of the
complainant, the editor had no ill will against him and had expressed regret for such
publication, it was held that the editor could not be held responsible in connection with
the defamation.44.
[s 500.10] 'Imputation'.—
It is immaterial whether the imputation is conveyed obliquely or indirectly, or by way of
question, conjecture, or exclamation, or by irony.45.
The words "coward, dishonest man, and something worse than either"46. and words to
the effect that the complainant and others were preparing to bring a false charge
against the accused,47. were held to be defamatory. Calling a counsel "badmash" in the
open Court was held to be not an offence within the meaning of section 499. The Court
said that it might come under section 504. The acquittal of the accused under section
500 was held to be proper.48. The accused married the complainant by exchange of
garlands in a temple. He lived with her for a few days and then started demanding
money and described her as unchaste woman and not decent looking. The Court said
that the ingredients of section 500 were prima facie made out and, therefore, the
accused was liable to be prosecuted.49.
[s 500.11] 'Concerning any person'.—
The words must contain an imputation concerning some particular person or persons
whose identity can be established. That person need not necessarily be a single
individual. Where the accused published in a paper an account of an outrage on a
woman alleged to have been perpetrated by two constables out of four constables
stationed at a police station, it was held that, in the absence of proof that it was
intended to charge any particular and identifiable constables with the alleged offence,
the accused could not be convicted.50. Where a film which was alleged to be
defamatory of lawyers as a class formed the basis of a defamation case against the
producers including artists and Chairman of the Central Board of Censors, it was held
that though the offence of defamation can be committed in regard to a company or
collection of persons in view of Explanation 2 to section 499, IPC, 1860, yet it is
necessary to show that this collection of persons is a small determinate body whose
identity can be fixed. Advocates as a class are incapable of being defamed.51. In this
connection see comments under head "Explanation-2" infra.
A newspaper is not a person and therefore, it is not an offence to defame a newspaper.
Defamation of a newspaper may, in certain cases, involve defamation of those
responsible for its publication.52.
[s 500.12] Innuendo.—
Where the statement does not refer to the complainant directly, the doctrine of
innuendo may be pressed into service for the purpose of showing that the complainant
was the real target of the attack. He must bring forward additional facts showing how
the words are related to him in a manner which is defamatory. "A true innuendo is an
innuendo by which the plaintiff alleges a special defamatory meaning of the words
distinct from their ordinary meaning and arising by virtue of extrinsic facts or matters
known to the recipients."53. Applying this principle to the facts of a case before it, the
Supreme Court laid down that an innuendo cannot be established by an evidence
showing inferences of two kinds. The evidence of additional facts must be capable of
showing that the words were applicable to the complainant and the complainant
alone.54.
2. 'Such imputation should have been made by words either spoken or intended to be
read, or by signs or by visible representation'.—IPC, 1860 makes no distinction
between written and spoken defamation.55.
[s 500.13] 'By signs or by visible representations'.—
The words 'visible representation' will include every possible form of defamation which
ingenuity can devise. For instance, a statue, a caricature, and effigy, chalk marks on a
wall, signs, or pictures may constitute a libel.56. The publication of a group photograph
with a false caption depicting the persons in the photograph as soldiers of a "goonda
war" was held to be defamatory.57. In another case, Complainant alleged that four
photographs of an incident were published in a newspaper, in which, one photograph
showed the complainant more or less nude and that has caused defamation and harm
to him. The photographs during a protest demonstration a protest demonstration and
depicted the sequence of events when the complainant was being pulled out of a
police jeep. It can never be stated that the publication of the photographs in the
newspaper was with the intention or with knowledge or having reason to believe that it
will harm the reputation of the complainant. Proceedings are liable to be quashed.58.
3. 'Intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will
harm'.—In this section the expression "harm" means harm to the reputation of the
aggrieved party.59. It is not necessary to prove that the complainant actually suffered
directly or indirectly from the scandalous imputation alleged; it is sufficient to show
that the accused intended to harm, or knew, or had reason to believe that the
imputation made by him would harm the reputation of the complainant.60. A statement
made primarily with the object that the person making it should escape from a difficulty
cannot be made the subject of a criminal charge merely because it contains matter
which may be harmful to the reputation of other people or hurtful to their feelings.61.
The meaning to be attached to the word 'harm' is not the ordinary sense in which it is
used. By 'harm' is meant imputation on a man's character made and expressed to
others so as to lower him in their estimation. Anything which lowers him merely in his
own estimation does not constitute defamation.62. Accusing a person in front of the
public, of having illicit relations with accuser's sister cannot be considered to have been
uttered merely as scurrilous abuse in the situation in which they were used against the
accused. The accusation took place in an open gathering when not only the members
of the Gram Panchayat were present but also the members of the general public.
Conviction of the accused under section 500 IPC, 1860 was upheld.63.
[s 500.14] 'Reputation'.—
A man's opinion of himself cannot be called his reputation.64. A man has no 'reputation'
to himself and therefore, communication of defamatory matter to the person defamed
is no publication.
[s 500.15] Explanation 1.—
A prosecution may be maintained for defamation of a deceased person, but it has been
ruled that no suit for damages will lie in such a case. Where, therefore, a suit was
brought by the heir and nearest relation of a deceased person for defamatory words
spoken of such deceased person, but alleged to have caused damage to the plaintiff as
a member of the same family, it was held that the suit was not maintainable.65.
[s 500.16] Explanation 2.—
Imputation concerning company, association or collection of persons.—An action for libel
will lie at the suit of an incorporated trading company in respect of a libel calculated to
injure its reputation in the way of its business.66. The words complained of must attack
the corporation or company in the method of conducting its affairs, must accuse it of
fraud or mismanagement or must attack its financial position.67. A corporation has no
reputation apart from its property or trade. It cannot maintain an action for a libel
merely affecting personal reputation. The words complained of, to support a
prosecution, must reflect on the management of its business and must injuriously
affect the corporation, as distinct from the individuals who compose it. They must
attack the corporation in its method of conducting its affairs, must accuse it of fraud or
mismanagement or must attack its financial position. A corporation cannot bring a
prosecution for words which merely affect its honour or dignity.68.
A prosecution lies for libelling Hindu widows as a class.69. Where the defamatory
articles, published in a newspaper, related to the habitual immoral conduct of the girls
of a particular college, but no particular girl or girls were named in or identifiable from
the articles, and the complaint was filed by a number of girls of the college, it was held
that the author of the articles was guilty of defamation, in as much as the inevitable
effect of the articles on the mind of the reader must be to make him believe that it was
habitual with the girls of the college to misbehave in the ways mentioned so that all the
girls in the college collectively and each girl individually must suffer in reputation.70.
This Explanation covers any collection of persons but such collection of persons must
be identifiable in the sense that one could with certainty say that this group of
particular people has been defamed as distinguished from the rest of the community.
Public Prosecutors and Assistant Public Prosecutors at Aligarh in Uttar Pradesh were
held to be an identifiable group and hence, could be the subject of defamation
according to the Supreme Court.71. In this connection see para captioned "Concerning
any Person" and the cases mentioned therein.
The offending article must carry an imputation against a definite and ascertainable
body of people. A complaint was not allowed to be continued where the article
published in a magazine carried imputations against a certain community in general
and not against any particular group, nor the community was found to be a definite and
identifiable body of people and the imputations also did not relate to the
complainant.72. Where a news in a local daily about insufficiency of sandal wood
pieces at the cremation of the President of a National Political Party was published, but
no defamatory words or imputation against the said political party was used in the
news item and it did not refer to any definite or determinate person or persons, it was
held that offence of defamation was not constituted.73.
[s 500.17] Explanation 4.—
This Explanation would not apply when the words used and forming the subject-matter
of the charge are per se defamatory.74. Describing a woman that she has paramours
wherever she goes is per se defamatory.75. Wanton allegations by the accused against
the complainant who was his wife that she was not virgin at the time of marriage, that
she had a living husband at that time and had a child from him and that she had gone
to the extent of committing theft, were held to be defamatory. The burden was upon
him to show that the publication in question was necessary in good faith for the
protection of his interest. He could not do this and, therefore, the Court showed no
mercy and sentenced him to simple imprisonment for two months and a fine of Rs.
3,000.76.
[s 500.18] Exceptions.—
The defamatory statement does not fall within any of the Exceptions by reason merely
of the fact that it is punishable as an offence under section 182 or any other section of
the Code.77.
[s 500.19] Members of Legislature and Parliament.—
In the absence of legislation by the Indian Parliament on the subject, the privileges,
powers and immunities of a House of State Legislature or Parliament or of its
members are the same as those of the House of Commons in England. A member of
the House of Commons has an absolute privilege in respect of what he has spoken
within the four walls of the House but there is only a qualified privilege in his favour
even in respect of what he has himself said in the House, if he causes the same to be
published in the public press. Where a member of a State Legislature got published in
the press a question which the member had sought to put in the House but which the
Speaker had disallowed and the question contained defamatory imputations regarding
the character of a person, it was held that the publication was not accepted by any of
the exceptions to section 499.78.
A minister was questioned about misappropriation of Government funds. He replied by
saying that the preliminary enquiry made by the government showed that some
misappropriation had taken place. He also disclosed the names of the persons
involved including that of the complainant as indicated in the report. This part of the
proceedings was published in the newspaper of the accused. Since the newspaper
exercised its qualified privilege in good faith, it was held that there was no intention to
cause harm to the reputation of the complainant.79.
[s 500.20] Exception 1.—
This Exception and Exception 4 require that the imputation should be true. The
remaining Exceptions do not require it to be so. They only require that it should be
made in good faith. When truth is set up as a defence, it must extend to the entire libel
and it is not sufficient that only a part of the libel is proved to be true.80.
The truth of the imputation complained of shall amount to defence if it was for the
public benefit that the imputation should be published, but not otherwise. A Court may
find that an imputation is true, and made for the public good, but on considering the
manner of the publication (e.g., in a newspaper) it may hold that the particular
publication is not for the public good, and is, therefore, not privileged.81. To get the
benefit of this exception the accused must prove that the statement made by him is
true in its substance and effect and not in part. Whether or not the statement was
made for public good, an enquiry must be directed to the benefit that the publication
has rendered or sought to render to the public or to a section of the public and whether
the matter did concern the public.82.
[s 500.21] CASE.—
C was put out of caste by a committee of his caste-fellows on the ground that there
was an improper intimacy between him and a woman of his caste. Certain persons,
members of the committee, circulated a letter to the members of their caste stating
that C and such woman had been put out of caste and requesting the members of the
caste not to receive them into their houses or to eat with them and also made
defamatory statements about them. It was held that, had such persons contented
themselves with announcing the determination of the committee and the grounds upon
which such determination was based, they would have been protected, but in as much
as they went further and made false and uncalled for statements regarding C; they had
not acted in good faith.83. If a person really was outcasted, a statement to the
members of the brotherhood that he was outcasted is the kind of statement
contemplated by the expression "public good".84. Where there exists a civil dispute
between the parties as to the property where school is situated and run by
complainant, which is admittedly pending in civil Court, mere alerting by accused to
parents to take admission of their children at their own risk in school or in summer
camp cannot be considered as defamatory or affecting the reputation or character of
complainant. The above caution notice by no stretch of imagination can be considered
as imputations actionable within the meaning of section 499 of the IPC, 1860.85.
[s 500.22] Exception 2.—
Every citizen has a right to comment on those acts of public men which concern him as
a citizen of the country, if he does not make his commentary a cloak for malice and
slander. A writer in a public paper has the same right as any other person, and it is his
privilege, if indeed it is not his duty, to comment on the act of public men which
concern not himself only but which concern the public, and the discussion of which is
for the public good. And where a person makes the public conduct of a public man the
subject of comment and it is for the public good, he is not liable to an action if the
comments are made honestly, and he honestly believes the facts to be as he states
them, and there is no wilful misrepresentation of fact or any misstatement which he
must have known to be a misstatement, if he had exercised ordinary care.86. In order
that a comment may be fair (a) it must be based on facts truly stated, (b) it must not
impute corrupt or dishonourable motives to the person whose conduct or work is
criticised except in so far as such imputations are warranted by the facts, (c) it must be
the honest expression of the writer's real opinion made in good faith, and (d) it must be
for the public good. The question to be considered in such cases is, would any fair
man, however prejudiced he might be, or however exaggerated or obstinate his views
may be, have made the criticism.87.
Any opinion expressed in good faith made by a public servant would not amount to
offence of defamation when public servant was acting in discharge of public functions.
According to section 21 of the IPC, 1860, clause fifth, a member of Panchayat assisting
a Court of justice is within the scope of definition of "public servant". Hence, opinion
expressed by member of Panchayat in good faith to assist Court of Justice does not
amount to defamation.88.
Those who fill a public position must not be too thin skinned in reference to comments
made upon them. Whoever fills a public position renders himself open to attack. He
must accept an attack as a necessary, though unpleasant, appendage to his office.89.
The law of defamation under the IPC, 1860 cannot be equated with that of contempt of
Court in general terms.90. The Court did not accept the proposition that a reply
submitted to a contempt notice can in no case amount to contempt of Court in the light
of the second exception to section 499.91.
[s 500.23] Exception 3.—
The conduct of publicists who take part in politics or other matters concerning the
public can be commented on in good faith. M, a medical man and the editor of a
medical journal, said in such journal of an advertisement published by H, another
medical man, in which H solicited the public to subscribe to a hospital of which he was
surgeon in charge stating the number of successful operations which had been
performed, that it was unprofessional. It was held that in as much as such
advertisement had the effect of making such hospital a "public question", M was within
the third, sixth and ninth Exceptions.92. A newspaper carried a letter to the editor
stating certain facts about a co-operative hospital to the effect that there were
embezzlements; female nurses were harassed if they refused to attend night duty and
that the President signed only convenient vouchers. It was held that this was an
assertion of facts and not an expression of opinion. The mere fact that the letter
demanded an inquiry would not convert the factual assertion into an opinion. The third
Exception was not applicable.93.
Where the published statement was that the Marwari community had no faith and love
towards India, their mother land, it was held that this was not sufficient to constitute
the offence of defamation. The process issued by the magistrate was liable to be
quashed.94.
[s 500.24] Comparative Advertisement.—
A commercial advertisement is a form of speech and "Commercial speech" is a part of
the freedom of speech and expression guarantee under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution.95. Comparative advertising is advertisement where a party advertises his
goods or services by comparing them with goods and services of another party. This is
generally done by either projecting that the advertiser's product is of same or superior
quality to that of the compared product or by denigrating the quality of the compared
product. The advertiser has right to boast of its technological superiority in comparison
with product of the competitor. He can declare that his goods are better than that of his
competitor. However, while doing so, he cannot disparage the goods of the competitor.
Therefore, if the advertising is an insinuating campaign against the competitor's
product such a negative campaigning is not permissible.96. The allegation was that
advertisement published by petitioner along with Associated Traders at instance of
petitioner disparaging respondents business. The Associated Traders had admitted
that alleged advertisement was taken out by them on their own and Petitioner
Company had nothing to do with that. Offence under section 500 IPC, 1860 is not made
out against the petitioner.97.
[s 500.25] Exception 4.—
Where there are judicial proceedings before a properly constituted judicial tribunal
exercising its jurisdiction in open Court, then the publication, without malice, of a fair
and accurate report of what takes place before that tribunal is privileged.98. Though the
publication of such proceedings may be to the disadvantage of the particular individual
concerned, yet it is of vast importance to the public that the proceedings of Courts of
Justice should be universally known. The general advantage to the country in having
these proceedings made public more than counterbalances the inconvenience to the
private persons whose conduct may be the subject of such proceedings.99. It is
immaterial whether the proceedings were ex parte or not,100. or whether the Court had
jurisdiction or not.101. But a report of judicial proceedings cannot be published if the
Court has prohibited the publication of any such proceedings,102. or where the subject-
matter of the trial is obscene103. or blasphemous.104.
[s 500.26] CASE.—
A trustee of a temple was charged with defamation, the alleged defamatory statement
being that the complainant, who performed the worship in the temple, had been
convicted and sent to jail for the theft of idols belonging to the temple. At the time
when the statement was made, an appointment in connection with the temple was in
question. It was held that the trustee was justified in making the statement either in the
interest of the temple or because the statement was no more than a publication of the
result of proceedings in a Court of Justice.105.
[s 500.27] Exception 5.—
The administration of justice is a matter of universal interest to the whole public. The
judgment of the Court, the verdict of jury, the conduct of parties and of witnesses, may
all be made subjects of free comment. But the criticism should be made in good faith
and should be fair. It must not wantonly assail the character of others or impute
criminality to them. But in commenting on such matters, a public writer, as much as a
private writer, is bound to attend to the truth, and to put forward the truth honestly and
in good faith and to the best of his knowledge and ability. It is not to be expected that in
discharging his duty of a public journalist he will always be infallible. His judgment may
be biased, one way or the other, without the slightest reflection upon his good faith;
and, therefore, if his comments are fair, no one has a right to complain.106.
[s 500.28] Exception 6.—
The object of this Exception is that the public should be aided by comment in its
judgment of the public performance submitted to its judgment. All kinds of
performances in public may be truly criticised provided the comments are made in
good faith and are fair. Liberty of criticism is allowed; otherwise we should neither have
purity of taste nor of morals. Good faith under this Exception requires not logical
infallibility but due care and attention.107.
[s 500.29] Exception 7.—
This Exception allows a person under whose authority others have been placed, either
by their own consent or by the law, to censure, in good faith, those who are so placed
under his authority, so far as regards the matter to which that authority relates.108. But
if this privilege is exceeded in any way the offence will be established. A man may in
good faith complain of the conduct of a servant to the master of the servant even
though the complaint amounts to defamation, but he is not protected if he publishes
the complaint in a newspaper. A spiritual superior, in pronouncing and publishing a
sentence of excommunication, may be protected by privilege so long as the publication
is not more extensive than is required to effectuate the purpose for which the privilege
is conceded to him for the censure of a member of the sect in matters appertaining to
religion or the communication of a sentence he is authorized to pronounce to those
who are to guide themselves by it.109. Where the complainant was dismissed from
service on the allegation of theft of his master's property after a full domestic enquiry
in which the complainant was given an opportunity to defend himself, the finding of
such a domestic enquiry saying that the allegation was true could not form the basis of
defamation case as it is fully protected by Exceptions 7 and 8 of section 499, IPC,
1860. To hold otherwise would amount to paralysing the administration of justice.110.
[s 500.30] CASE.—Imputation made by person in authority.—
The allegation was that accused, principal of a medical college made compliant
against complainant, doctor that she was not taking interest in teaching or attending
hospital, etc., and that she was more worried about her income from nursing home. It
was held that words mentioned in complaint were not with intention to defame the
complaint or harm her reputation. Compliant was made within idea to bring about
betterment in college. Proceedings under section 500 IPC, 1860 is liable to be set
aside.111.
[s 500.31] Exception 8.—
Eighth Exception to section 499 provides that it is not defamation to prefer in good
faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over
that person with respect to the subject matter of accusation. In the present case, the
accused No. 1 and other members of Society approached the police because
admittedly, the letter received by them contained some obscene material and
defamatory statement against the daughter of the accused No. 1 and they expected
guidance, which could include appropriate action against the culprit. It is clear that the
case is clearly covered by Exception 8 and no case under section 500 IPC, 1860 could
be made out.112. In order to establish a defence under this exception the accused
would have to prove that the person to whom the complaint was made had lawful
authority over the person complained against, in respect of the subject-matter of the
accusation.113. To obtain the protection given by this Exception (1) the accusation
must be made to a person in authority over the party accused, and (2) the accusation
must be preferred in good faith.114. Defamatory averments made in a plaint are not
absolutely protected in a criminal proceeding for defamation.115.
[s 500.32] CASES.—
The accused had lodged a report with the police contending that the complainant had
poured acid on the coconut trees and had damaged the same and he had asked the
police to take action against the said complaint. According to the complainant the said
complaint damaged his reputation. It was contended that the case would be covered
by Exceptions 8 and 9 of section 499 and the accused sought to quash the
proceedings under section 500 IPC, 1860. The High Court found the petition meritless
and had dismissed it. The Supreme Court held that:
for the purpose of bringing his case within the purview of the Exceptions 8 and 9 appended
to section 499 of the Penal Code, it would be necessary for the appellant to prove good faith
for the protection of the interests of the person making it or of any other person or for the
public good. It is now a well-settled principle of law that those who plead exception must
prove it. The burden of proof that his action was bona fide would, thus, be on the appellant
alone. At this stage, in our opinion, it would have been premature for the High Court to
consider the materials placed by the, appellant before it so as to arrive at a definite
conclusion that there was no element of bad faith on the part of the appellant in making the
said complaint before the police authorities.116.
[s 500.33] Exception 9.—Good faith, individual interest or public good.—
This Exception posits that the person to whom the communication is made has an
interest in protecting the person making the accusation. Besides the bona fides of the
person making the imputation, the person to whom the imputation is conveyed must
have a common interest with the person making it which is served by the
communication.117. The interest of the person referred to in this Exception has to be
real and legitimate when communication is made in protection of the interest of the
person making it. The privilege extends only to a communication upon the subject with
respect to which the privilege extends and the privilege can be claimed in exercise of
the right or safeguarding of the interest which creates the privilege.118. The regional
manager of a bank issued confidential circular to branch managers of his region
advising them to be vigilant while dealing with persons included in the list including the
complainant. The circular was issued in his official capacity in public interest and under
instructions of the Central office. The Court said that the circular was covered by
Exception 9. Therefore, even if the allegations made in the complaint were true, no
offence would be made out under section 500.119.
This exception relates to private communication which a person makes in good faith
for the protection of his own interest. This exception covers not only such allegations
of facts as can be proved true but also expression of opinions and personal inferences.
It has been incorporated to protect the interests of the parties in their business
transaction which are generally done bona fide and, therefore, the rule of public good on
which this principle is based is, that honest transaction of business and social
intercourse would otherwise be deprived of the protection which they should enjoy.
Whether any imputation made is with a motive or mala fide intention to lower the
reputation or is made in good faith is to be determined from the facts and
circumstances of the case. Undisputedly, the requirement of good faith and public
good, both, are to be satisfied and the failure to prove good faith would exclude the
application of Exception 9 in favour of the accused even if the requirement of public
good is satisfied. The words 'good faith' as appearing in exception 9th not only require
logical infallibility but also due care and attention.120.
This Exception refers to any imputation made in good faith, whereas the first Exception
applies only to true imputation made for the public good. That he acted in good faith
must be proved by the accused.121. Question of good faith is a question of fact and
has to be decided in course of the trial and at the initial stage. The journalists do not
enjoy any special privilege.122.
In determining the question of good faith, regard should be to the intellectual capacity
of the accused, his predilections and the surrounding facts.123.
Where a rustic villager objected to the appointment of the complainant as a village
munsiff in the bona fide belief that he was a rowdy and as such undesirable for a public
post like this, it was held that he acted in good faith and was protected by this
Exception.124.
In order to establish good faith and bona fides it has to be seen first the circumstances
under which the defamatory matter was written or uttered; secondly, whether there was
any malice; thirdly, whether the accused made any inquiry before he made the
allegations; fourthly, whether there are reasons to accept the version that he acted with
care and caution and finally whether there is preponderance of probability that the
accused acted in good faith.125.
The burden lies on the person accused to prove the bona fide aspect of his publication.
Cross-examination of the complainant can be used as a device for establishing good-
faith. An imputation was made in a newspaper item that the complainant lady doctor
had duped the Government by presenting false transfer allowance bills. The lady
doctor's sole testimony that the publication harmed her reputation was held to be not
sufficient to sustain her complaint. The accused showed that the publication was in
good faith and in public interest.126.
Where the agreement for selling their properties for settling their dues was signed by
the accused persons and registered before the Sub-Registrar in the presence of the
accused but subsequently a publication in the newspaper was made by the accused
after about two and a half months that the agreement was executed under compulsion,
it was held that the publication was not made in 'good faith' and could not be brought
under Exception 9 of section 499.127.
The ninth Exception to section 499 provides that it is not defamation to make an
imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good
faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any other person,
or for the public good. Even if it is assumed that the accused No. 1 and other accused
made the imputation against the respondent No. 1 that he had written the letters and
thus, that imputation was made against his character, still that was made in good faith
because they wanted protection of the interest of the members of the family of
accused No. 1 and particularly his daughter. They did not approach any unconnected
person, but police who could protect the interest of the accused No. 1 and his family
members. In view of the legal position and the facts, which are clear from the
complaint and the documents submitted with the complaint, it is clear that the case is
clearly covered by Exceptions 8 and 9 and no case under section 500 IPC, 1860 could
be made out.128.
[s 500.34] Club committee.—
The committee members of a social club, even if wrong, are given protection under this
Exception, without which it would be impossible for such a body to function. Where the
respondent, who was the wife of a member of a social club and was privileged to use
the club, preferred a complaint against the members of the committee for defaming
her in a letter addressed by them to her husband, it was held that as the committee had
acted in good faith, even if they were mistaken they were protected by this
Exception.129.
[s 500.35] Communication by member of caste.—
There is a dividing line between the passing of a resolution at a caste meeting and its
communication by the authorities of the caste to its members in the discharge of their
social duty. If any member of a caste publishes to all its members a caste resolution in
such discharge of duty the law will hold the occasion of the publication to be privileged.
But there must be good faith on the part of the member who publishes, that is, it must
be proved that the publication was made with due care and attention.130. There must
not be excessive publication, e.g., publication in a newspaper.131. Where a libellous
communication is made regarding a member of a caste, the mere fact that the person
making such communication is a member of a caste will not of itself suffice to make
the communication privileged.132. A person making defamatory expressions for the
protection of his son's interest is not privileged, unless the imputation is made in good
faith.133.
[s 500.36] Privileges of Judges, etc.—
The privileges of parties, counsel, attorney, pleader and witnesses come under this
Exception. So also, statements made in pleadings and reports to superior officers are
protected by it. (As to civil actions, see the author's Law of Torts, 19th Edn; Chapter
XIII).
In India the law regarding defamatory statements, made in the course of judicial
proceeding, by judges, counsel or pleaders, witnesses and parties is lacking in
uniformity. The High Court of Madras in earlier cases adopted the English rule of
absolute immunity in all cases. The Bombay High Court has not followed the English
rule in cases of criminal prosecution on the ground that English law could not be
resorted to where it went beyond the terms of section 499: but in civil actions it has
followed the dictum of the Privy Council in Baboo Gunnesh Dutt Singh v Mugneeram
Chowdhry.134. The Allahabad High Court has gone a step further and held that cases of
defamation under the Code as well as civil suits for damages must be decided in
accordance with the provisions embodied in the IPC, 1860 and the Indian Evidence Act.
The Calcutta High Court has held that the liability of a person prosecuted for
defamation must be determined by the application of the provisions of the IPC, 1860
and not otherwise.135. The Patna High Court has adopted the view of the Calcutta High
Court.136.
[s 500.37] Counsel, pleader, etc.—
Where the accused, father of the complainant, denied through a lawyer's notice that the
complainant was his son imputing unchastity to his mother and as such was not
entitled to any family property, it was held that the communication was protected under
the 9th Exception to section 499, IPC, 1860, and the typing of that notice by the lawyer's
clerk also did not constitute publicity.137.
The Kerala High Court has held that counsel who has signed the pleading of his client
can rely on this Exception.138.
[s 500.38] Witness.—
The Bombay High Court has in a Full Bench case laid down that relevant statements
made by a witness on oath or solemn affirmation in a judicial proceeding are not
absolutely privileged on a prosecution for defamation, but are governed by the
provisions of section 499.139.
The Allahabad High Court in a Full Bench case held that a witness could be prosecuted
for defamatory statements concerning a person unless he showed that the statements
fell under one of the Exceptions to this section.140.
The Nagpur High Court had followed the Bombay, the Calcutta and the Allahabad High
Courts and held that a person giving evidence in a Court of law is not entitled to an
absolute privilege in respect of statements which he makes and is consequently not
immune from a complaint of defamation by reason of words uttered on oath in the
witness-box.141.
The Madhya Pradesh High Court followed the Bombay, the Calcutta and the Nagpur
High Courts.142.
[s 500.39] Pleadings.—
Authority is strongly against the absolute immunity from prosecution for defamatory
statements contained in applications, pleadings and affidavits. The Bombay High Court
has held that statements made in a written statement filed by the accused are not
absolutely privileged but are governed by the provisions of this section.143. The
allegation was that the averments contained in the pleadings and oral evidence in a
suit filed by the accused constituted defamatory statements. The Court held that on
reading of Exception 9 to section 499 of the IPC, 1860 the alleged imputations
contained in pleadings and evidence in civil suit OS No. 966 of 1998 and AS No. 155 of
2004 are covered by Exception 9 of section 499 of the IPC, 1860, even assuming that
the imputations are prima facie defamatory in nature.144.
The Madras High Court has held in a Full Bench case that a defamatory statement in a
complaint to a Magistrate is not absolutely privileged.145.
The Patna High Court had held, that a defamatory statement, whether on oath or
otherwise, falls within section 499 and is not absolutely privileged. Where in a plaint the
accused described the complainant (defendant No. 3) as the "kept woman" of
defendant No. 1 without any foundation, it was held that he was guilty of
defamation.146.
[s 500.40] Vicarious liability.—
A defamatory letter was issued on the pad of a partnership firm. The letter was signed
by one of the partners. The complainant in his examination before the Court did not say
on oath anything against the rest of the partners who had not signed the letter. The
Court said that such other partners who had not signed could not be vicariously held
liable with the signing partner.147.
[s 500.41] Communications with counsel.—
Communication with one's counsel for legal advice is not a publication. The Court
distinguished the case from the Supreme Court decision in MC Vergheese v TJ
Poonan.148. In this case, a husband's letters to his wife contained defamatory remarks
about her father. The father's proceedings against the husband were allowed because
those letters amounted to a publication. But a communication between a client and his
counsel is not a publication because of the intimate relationship between them. The
counsel has no separate existence from the client in matters relating to legal duties.
Communication to the council is communication to the client.149.
[s 500.42] Reports.—
The report of an officer, in the execution of his duty, under his superior's orders, which
contains defamatory imputations against others, but which does not appear to have
been made recklessly or unjustifiably is covered by this Exception. But a totally false
report will not be protected.150.
[s 500.43] Complaint through power of attorney.—
The aggrieved person was employed in a foreign country. A complaint filed through a
power of attorney was held as not offending the provisions of section 199(1), Cr PC,
1973 as the complainant suffered from the infirmity of being away in a foreign
country.151.
[s 500.44] Exception 10.—
This Exception protects a person giving caution in good faith to another for the good of
that other, or of some person in whom that other is interested or for the public good.
[s 500.45] Complaint by aggrieved person necessary.—
No Court shall take cognizance of this offence except upon a complaint made by the
person aggrieved (section 199 Cr PC, 1973). The words "person aggrieved" does not
mean "person defamed". The words "person aggrieved" has a wider connotation than
the words "person defamed".152.
A complaint for defamation by the person aggrieved by it can be entertained by a Court
notwithstanding that the accused could have been prosecuted on the same facts under
section 182 on the complaint of a public servant. The two offences are fundamentally
distinct in nature, although they may arise out of one and the same statement of the
accused. The defamatory statement does not fall within any of the Exception to section
499 by reason merely of the fact that it is punishable as an offence under section 182,
or any other section of the Code; nor is this section included in the list of sections
contained in section 195(1)(b) of the Cr PC, 1973.153. Where the imputations were
against the managing director of a society, the society was held to be not an aggrieved
person and, therefore, had no locus standi to file a complaint.154.
A newspaper published extracts from books written on a former Prime Minister,
imputing charges of corruption against him and also his family members including his
sons, daughter and wife. It was held that his sons could be said to be aggrieved
persons. A complaint filed by one of the sons was not to be quashed.155.
The continuation of the proceedings even after the death of the complainant has been
held to be not proper.156. Where the allegation in the complaint was that the Kerala
Police had been defamed, the Court said that Kerala Police was not a definite and
determinable body and, therefore, a member of the Kerala Police was not a person
affected by the defamatory statement and his complaint was not maintainable.157.
When the statements in question are not directed against any person or against an
identifiable group of individuals, the complainants cannot be said to be an aggrieved
persons. The complainants have alleged defamation in respect of imputations against
the character of Tamil-speaking women, which could be viewed as a class of persons.
However, the appellant's remarks did not suggest that all women in Tamil Nadu have
engaged in pre-marital sex. In fact her statement in News Magazine did not refer to any
specific individual or group at all.158.
[s 500.46] Complaint by director of company.—
Locus standi.—The words "some person aggrieved" do not make it necessary that the
complaint should be made by the very person who has been defamed. In the case of an
imputation against a company, a director of the company would fall within the words
"some person aggrieved". He can file a complaint.159.
[s 500.47] Complaint by advocate.—
False allegations were made in a newspaper against the Commissioner of
Endowments. A complaint filed by an Advocate was held to be non-maintainable being
not an aggrieved person.160.
[s 500.48] Employer—
Labour.—Defamatory statements were made against retrenched workmen in the
counter filed by the management. Some of the statements were repeated on different
dates before the labour Court and labour officer. The Court said that the question of
limitation could not be decided until the starting point of the offence was known and
that had to be decided at the trial.161. The Court further said that aspects of good faith
in the utterances could also be decided only after evidence.162.
[s 500.49] President of Municipality.—
The President of a Municipality is not a 'person aggrieved', within the meaning of
section 199 of the Cr PC, 1973, by the defamations of his subordinate officers.163.
[s 500.50] Complaint against Juristic person.—
Simply because the accused is a corporate body, it cannot be said that it cannot
commit an offence of defamation as defined under section 499 IPC, 1860.164.
Section 499, IPC, 1860, is an offence involving personal malicious intent, which is
evident from the fact that one of the essential ingredients is either intention to harm or
knowledge or reasons to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the
other. An artificial/juristic person cannot be prosecuted for offence under section 500,
IPC, 1860, for such an artificial/juristic person cannot be attributed with any malicious
intention which can be attributed only to a living person. Chief Educational Officer being
an artificial/ juristic person prosecution against him for offence under section 500, IPC,
1860 would not be maintainable.165.
[s 500.51] Punishment.—
The accused, an editor of a weekly, published an article in his paper making defamatory
allegation against the petitioner, who was a Class I Officer and belonged to a
respectable business family. The editor made no amends till conviction. Sentence of
simple fine was enhanced to RI of two months and fine of Rs. 2,000.166.
In a case of defamation, the revision petition for enhancement of the sentence was
filed seven years after the commission of the offence. It was held that delay in filing the
revision cannot be a ground for not to enhance the sentence when the accused had not
made any amends for his criminal act.167. Where the utterances of the accused in a
meeting were proved to harm the reputation of the complainant, his conviction under
section 500 was held to be proper.168.
For the publication of defamatory matter in a newspaper the sentence awarded was
that of imprisonment till the rising of the Court and fine of Rs. 500. It was held to be too
low and inadequate considering the damage caused to the reputation of the
complainant. The fine amount was accordingly enhanced to Rs. 10,000.
[s 500.52] Quashing of complaint.—
There were allegations in a private complaint that the respondents made imputations
against the complainant in applications made under section 436, Cr PC, 1973. The
sworn statements and documents produced showed that the imputations were made
with the intention or knowledge or having reason to believe that they will harm
reputation. Thus, a prima facie was made out. The High Court could not at that stage
say that there was no reasonable prospect of conviction at the trial. Questions of good
faith and of intention could be examined on the basis of evidence at the trial. The trial
must go on. The quashing of the complaint was not proper.169.
[s 500.53] Application of exceptions in pre-trial stage.—
The Supreme Court in Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande, v Uttam,170. held that issuing of
process against the accused for the offence punishable under section 499 punishable
under section 500 of the IPC, 1860 can be questioned in higher Courts. Ultimately, the
Supreme Court quashed proceedings relating to prosecution of such a case in that
reported decision by applying Exception 8 to section 499 of the IPC, 1860. Therefore, it
cannot be said that application of exception cannot be considered at pre-trial stage and
by invoking section 482 of the Cr PC, 1973.171. In Vedurumudi Rama Rao v Chennuri
Venkat Rao,172. Court considered applicability of Exception 9 to section 499 of the IPC,
1860 and held that truth of imputation need not be probed by such accused while
claiming privilege under Exception 9; and finally quashed proceedings in criminal case
relating to the offence punishable under section 500 of the IPC, 1860. The Gujarat High
Court in Darusing Durgasing v State of Gujarat,173. followed the above said reported
decision of the Supreme Court and quashed criminal proceedings for the offence
punishable under section 500 of the IPC, 1860 in view of Exceptions 7, 8 and 9 to
section 499 of the IPC, 1860. In an examination fact situation, the Bombay High Court
in Valmiki Faleiro v Mrs. Lauriana Fernandes,174. went to the extent of holding a paper
publication containing certain imputations as one saved by Exception 9 because
intention of the accused was predominantly to protect his rights in the property and not
to harm reputation of the complainant. In Jeffrey J Diermeier v State of WB,175. it was
pleaded that in the light of Explanation 4 as well as Tenth Exception to section 499 IPC,
1860, the allegations in the complaint did not constitute an offence of defamation
punishable under section 500 IPC, 1860. But the Supreme Court held that the mere plea
that the accused believed that what he had stated was in "good faith" is not sufficient to
accept his defence and he must justify the same by adducing evidence. Court found it
difficult to hold that a case for quashing of the complaint under section 482 of the
Code has been made out.
[s 500.54] Jurisdiction.—
The Courts at the place of printing and publication of a newspaper as well as those at
the place of distribution have jurisdiction to entertain a complaint.176. The respondent
is said to have given an interview to the Newspaper "Economic Times" intending it to be
published and to be read by public. Therefore, though the act of making the defamatory
statement during the interview was done at a place outside the jurisdiction of the
Court, prosecution can be launched in Courts exercising jurisdiction over any one of the
places wherein circulation of the paper is made.177.
[s 500.55] Cognizance on Police report.—
In Shiv Kumar Agarwal v State of Meghalaya,178. Gauhati High Court examined the
question whether a Magistrate can take cognizance of a non-cognizable offence
punishable under section 500, IPC, 1860 on the basis of the police report submitted by
the police under section 173(2), Cr PC, 1973 while investigating both a cognizable
offence and a non-cognizable offence under section 155(4), Cr PC, 1973 even after the
accused is discharged from the cognizable case. It is held that as one of the offences
alleged against the petitioner was a cognizable offence, namely, section 505(2), IPC,
1860, by virtue of the legal fiction introduced in section 155(4), Cr PC, 1973, the case
was deemed to be a cognizable offence. Once the case was deemed to be a
cognizable offence, there was no legal impediment in investigating the case by the
police. After the case was investigated by the police, the charge-sheet was submitted
by them to the learned Magistrate under section 173, Cr PC, 1973 for trying the
petitioner under section 505 (2)/500, IPC, 1860. However, the charge made against the
petitioner under section 505(2), IPC, 1860 was quashed by this Court on the ground
that no prosecution sanction under section 196 (1A), Cr PC, 1973 was obtained by the
police. The net result is that the trial Court had to proceed with consideration of the
charge under section 500, IPC, 1860 and, after hearing the parties, framed the charge
accordingly by rejecting the prayer of the petitioner for dropping the charge against
him.179.
In the defamation matter, issuance of process after having examination of defamatory
material with reaction of the public, would certainly be sufficient to satisfy the test of
holding the enquiry under Section 202, Cr PC, 1973.180.
[s 500.56] Section 211 and Section 500.—
Section 211 imposes a punishment in case of a false charge or offence made with the
intent to injure someone before any Court of law, whereas section 500 provides for
punishment in case of a defamation of a person by any one. Defamation has been
defined under section 499 which provides inter alia whoever, by words either spoken or
intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any
imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to
believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in
the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. Making a false complaint
before a Court of law would amount to committing fraud on Court. It is for the Court to
proceed against the erring person. The provision has been made to preserve the
sanctity of the Court. Section 500 gives right to sue to a person who is defamed within
the meaning of section 499 by the conduct of the accused. These two provisions are
totally distinct and can be tried in absence of each other.181.
6. Note R, p 175.
7. It is not necessary to incorporate the whole of the published matter in a complaint. A
complaint was not dismissed only on the ground that the matter under complaint was
presented not in the body of the complaint, but in an attached document. T Kunhambu v A
Sojath, 1989 Cr LJ 1022 (Ker), following Balraj Khanna v Motiram, 1971 Cr LJ 1110 (SC). The
complaint must be made by the party aggrieved. His wife is not an aggrieved person and,
therefore, her complaint is not maintainable. Nazeem Bavakunju v State of Kerala, 1988 Cr LJ
487 (Ker). MN Meera v AC Mathew, 2002 Cr LJ 3845 (Ker), the name of the complainant was not
mentioned by the accused while making the alleged defamatory statement. The complaint
should not have been thrown overboard on that ground alone. KM Selvaraj v A Amarlal, 2002 Cr
LJ 3811 (Mad), defamatory statements in a circular against members and president of an
association regarding manipulation of accounts and misappropriation of funds. One of the
signatories was a chartered accountant who had checked the accounts. The CA applied for
dropping of his name because he was only a signatory. His request was accepted. It was held
that the order discharging him was not proper. All accused persons had to face the
consequences of the defamatory statement in the circular.
8. Standard Chartered Bank v Vinay Kumar Sood, 2010 Cr LJ 1277 (Del).
9. Bacon's Abrid, vol IV, p 457.
10. Sunilakhya v HM Jadwet, AIR 1968 Cal 266 [LNIND 1967 CAL 167] .
11. S Nihal Singh v Arjan Das, 1983 Cr LJ 777 (Del); see also DN Rao v RD Bhagvandas, 1986 Cr
LJ 888 (AP). M Chandran v F Fanthome, 2003 Cr LJ 2173 (Sik), complainant had full knowledge
of the document which was quite old, no witness cited, failure to make out defamatory nature of
the remarks, the accused discharged. Period of limitation had also expired and no condonation
was sought.
12. Varnakote Illath v Kotalmana Keshavan, (1900) 1 Weir 579.
13. SS Sanyal v KVR Nair, 1987 Cr LJ 2074 (Cal), relying on TJ Ponnel v MU Verghese, AIR 1967
Ker 228 [LNIND 1966 KER 242] : 1968 Cr LJ 1511 . It is different if the employee himself goes
round showing the notice to others. Such notice comes under 9th exception being necessary to
protect the employer's interest.
14. Boxsius v Goblet Freres, (1894) 1 QB 842 . Other matters of the same kind, Pullman v Walter
Hill, (1891) 1 QB 524 , dictation by the managing director of a company to his short-hand steno,
and after being transcribed, sent to the plaintiff, held to be a publication, but not followed in
subsequent cases. See Edmondson v Birch, (1907) 1 KB 371 and Sukhdeo Vithal v Prabhakar
Sukhdeo, 1974 Cr LJ 1435 (Bom).
15. PR Ramakrishnan v Subbaramma, AIR 1988 Ker 18 [LNIND 1986 KER 395] : 1988 Cr LJ 124 .
But see Rev Fr Bernad Thaltil v Ramchandran Pillai, 1987 Cr LJ 739 (Ker), notice containing
libellous imputations of misappropriation.
16. Sadashiv Atmaram, (1893) 18 Bom 205. In BP Bhaskar v BP Shiva, 1993 Cr LJ 2685 (Mad), it
was held that scurrilous allegations or imputations contained in notices exchanged between
parties do not amount to 'publication' under section 499. The court also held that a reply to the
notice sent to the party's advocate containing defamatory statements of the party is not
publication. It is a communication to the party himself.
17. Taki Husain, (1884) 7 All 205 (FB).
18. Sukhdeo v State, (1932) 55 All 253 .
19. Nagrathimam (Dr.) v M Kalirajan, 2001 Cr LJ 3007 (Mad).
20. Sankara v State, (1883) 6 Mad 381.
21. Thiagaraya v Krishnasami, (1892) 15 Mad 214.
22. Greene v Delanney, (1870) 14 WR (Cr) 27; Abdul Hakim v Tej Chandar, (1881) 3 All 815 .
23. Raja Shah, (1889) PR No. 14 of 1889.
24. Wenman v Ash, (1853) 13 CD 836.
25. Wennhak v Morgan, (1888) 20 QBD 635 ; Dr. Jaikishen Das v Sher Singh, (1910) PR No. 10 of
1910.
26. Pundit Mokand Ram, (1883) PR No. 12 of 1883.
27. Janardhan Damodhar Dikshit, (1894) 19 Bom 703. PM Abubacker v PJ Alexander, 2000 Cr LJ
1168 (Ker) the source of information regarding published defamatory statement is not a
consideration for prosecution for defamation. M Malle Reddy v T Venkatarama, 2000 Cr LJ 1086
(AP), a complaint against an alleged defamatory statement published in a newspaper was not
allowed to be quashed in the exercise of writ jurisdiction.
28. S Khushboo v Kanniammal, 2010 Cr LJ 2828 (SC) : AIR 2010 SC 3196 [LNIND 2010 SC 411] :
2010 (5) SCC 600 [LNIND 2010 SC 411] .
29. Charmesh Sharma v State Of Rajasthan, 2012 Cr LJ 2115 (Raj).
30. Howard, (1887) 12 Bom 167.
31. Harbhajan Singh, AIR 1961 Punj 215 .
32. BRK Murthy v State, 2013 Cr LJ 1602 (AP); Tankasala Ashok v State of AP, 2010 Cr LJ 2074
(AP) where there was nothing to show that editor had control over selection of publication,
proceedings against accused editor is liable to be quashed.
33. Dongar Singh v Krishna Kant, AIR 1958 MP 216 [LNIND 1958 MP 58] .
34. McLeod, (1880) 3 All 342 .
35. Ramasami v Lokanada, (1886) 9 Mad 387.
36. Bhagat Singh v Lachman Singh, AIR 1968 Cal 296 [LNIND 1967 CAL 189] . The chairman of a
company which is publishing a newspaper is not liable merely by virtue of his position as such.
Udayam Telugu Daily v State of AP, 1987 Cr LJ 143 (AP).
37. AK Jain v State of Sikkim, 1992 Cr LJ 843 (Sikkim).
38. KV Ramesh v HC Ramesh, 2001 Cr LJ 3556 .
39. KM Mathew v KA Abraham, 1998 Cr LJ 327 (Ker). CB Solanki v Srikanta Parashar, 1997 Cr LJ
3050 (Kant), "editor" for the purposes of the section does not include a person described as
chief editor or managing director, particularly when there were no specific allegations against
them in the complaint. The Court also explained the scope of first and ninth exception and the
burden of proof as to publication.
40. McLeod, supra; Girjashankar Kashiram, (1890) 15 Bom 286. The fact that the accused did
not know the person defamed through his newspaper is no defence. Sumatibai Vinayak Deo v
Nandkumar Deshpande, 1990 Cr LJ 2136 (Bom). Defamation in 1977. Appeal against acquittal
allowed in 1990. No further prosecution allowed. Fine of Rs. 2,000 with a direction that Rs. 1,800
should be handed over to the aggrieved person imposed.
41. Gambhirsinh R Dekare v Falgunbhai Chimanbhai Patel, (2013) 3 SCC 697 [LNIND 2013 SC
175] : 2013 Cr LJ 1757 : AIR 2013 SC 1590 [LNIND 2013 SC 175] .
42. Ravi Prakash v J C Diwakar Reddy, 2010 Cr LJ 2558 (AP).
43. P Lankesh v H Shivappa, 1994 Cr LJ 3510 (Kant).
44. Radhanath Rath v Birja Prasad Ray, 1992 Cr LJ 938 (Ori).
45. Archbold, 35th Edn, p 3633.
46. McCarthy, (1887) 9 All 420 .
47. Shibo Prosad Pandah, (1878) 4 Cal 124 .
48. Sirajuddin Ali v Mujtaba Ali, 2001 Cr LJ NOC 125 (AP).
49. Gautam Sahu v State of Orissa, 1999 Cr LJ 838 .
50. Government Advocate, B & O v Gopabandhu Das, (1922) 1 Pat 414. CL Sagar v Mayawati,
2003 Cr LJ 690 (All), the complaint was that the vice president of a political party defamed the
complainant by stating in a public meeting that the person with long moustache in the party was
a corrupt person. The complainant could not show that he was the only member of the party
with long moustache. The newspaper report of the meeting did not carry any such remark. No
offence made out.
51. Asha Parekh v State of Bihar, 1977 Cr LJ 21 (Pat); see also Narottamdas v Maganbhai, 1984
Cr LJ 1790 (Guj); Aruna Asafali v Purna Narayan, 1984 Cr LJ 1121 (Gau).
52. Maung Sein, (1926) 4 Ran 462.
53. Clerk & Lindsell on TORTS, 1701 (14th Edn 1975).
54. Manmohan Kalia v Yash, (1984) 3 SCC 499 [LNIND 1984 SC 101] : AIR 1984 SC 1161 [LNIND
1984 SC 101] . See also Sumatibai Vinayak Deo v Nandkumar Deshpande, 1990 Cr LJ 2136
(Bom), where the veiled expression that only "S" knew what happened to the bowls brought by
children to the school was held to be not defamatory; Lalliani v R L Rina, 1987 Cr LJ 1295 (Gau),
a biographical account of the life of a poet mentioning a named girl as his source of inspiration
and depicting their love affairs, a woman by that name was not able to convince the court that
she was the object of the attack. But see V Subair v PK Sudhakaran (Dr), 1987 Cr LJ 736 (Ker),
where a medical practitioner was described as a "professional debauch" and of "low moral
character", the accused was held liable because the complainant was able to prove that he was
meant to be attacked.
55. Parvathi v Mannar, (1884) 8 Mad 175.
56. Monson v Tussauds Ltd, (1894) 1 QB 671 , 692.
57. Chellappan Pillai v Karanjia, (1962) 2 Cr LJ 142 .
58. Jacob Mathew v Manikantan, 2013 Cr LJ (NOC) 62 : 2012 (3) KLT 824 .
59. Veeda Menezes v Yusuf Khan, (1966) 68 Bom LR 629 (SC).
60. Gobinda Pershad Pandey v Garth, (1900) 28 Cal 63 ; Pimento, (1920) 22 Bom LR 1224
[LNIND 1920 BOM 117] ; U Aung Pe, (1938) Ran 404 (FB).
61. Parwari, (1919) 41 All 311 .
62. Taki Husain, (1884) 7 All 205 , 220 (FB); J Jayalalitha v Arcot N Veerasamy, 1997 Cr LJ 4585
(Mad), absence of averment in the complaint that because of the imputation the complainant's
reputation had been lowered in the estimation of others, dismissal of the complaint was proper.
63. Mohan Lal v State of HP, 2011 Cr LJ 2413 (HP).
64. Ibid.
65. Luckumsey Rowji v Hurban Nursey, (1881) 5 Bom 580.
66. South Hetton Coal Co v NE News Association, (1894) 1 QB 133 .
67. Ibid, p 141.
68. Maung Chit Tay v Maung Tun Nyun, (1935) 13 Ran 297.
69. Mahim Chandra Roy v Watson, (1928) 55 Cal 1280 .
70. Wahid Ullah Ahrari, (1935) 57 All 1012 .
71. Sahib Singh, AIR 1965 SC 1451 [LNIND 1965 SC 15] .
72. Vishwa Nath v Shambhu Nath, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 277 (All). The complainant had died and the
proceedings were not allowed to be continued by others. The court distinguished Ashwin
Nanubhai Vyas v State of Maharashtra, 1967 Cr LJ 943 : AIR 1967 SC 963 where the mother of
the deceased complainant was allowed to continue the proceedings. The court cited Raj Kapoor
v Narendra Noranbhai Nagardas, (1974) 15 Guj LJ 125 where the contemptuous remarks against
Bhangi community uttered by caste Hindus were held to be not defamatory. The court said that
if a person were to say that all lawyers were thieves, no particular lawyer could sue him unless
there is something to point out to a particular individual, Eastwood v Holmes, (1858) 1 F&F 347.
The court also relied upon Narottamdas L Shah v Maganibhai, 1984 Cr LJ 1790 (Guj) where the
agitating lawyers were described as "Kazia dalals" (dispute brokers) and it was held that the use
of such words in reference to the lawyers as a class could not be taken to refer to a determinate
or identifiable class of lawyers, namely, the lawyers who were participating in the agitation. MP
Narayana Pillai v MP Chacko, 1986 Cr LJ 2002 (Ker) remarks in general about Christian girls
being used for prostitution to enable them to earn livelihood because their parents were not able
to support them were held to be too general to be defamatory of any body. The court said that
identity of the collection of the people will have to be established in relation to the defamatory
imputation. KM Mathew v TU Balan, 1985 Cr LJ 1039 (Ker) imputation against some leaders of
teachers who were on strike was held to be not actionable.
73. P Karunakaran v C Jayasooryan, 1992 Cr LJ 3540 (Ker).
74. Amar Singh v KS Badalia, (1965) 2 Cr LJ 693 ; Shamsher Singh v State, 1982 Cr LJ NOC 167
(Del).
75. J Chelliah v Rajeswari, 1969 Cr LJ 571 .
76. Madhuri Mukund Chitnis v Mukund Martand Chitnis, 1990 Cr LJ 2084 . The court referred to
Sukhdeo v State of Maharashtra, 1974 (Bom) LJ 777 : 1974 Cr LJ 1435 and Baburao Shankarrao v
Shaikh Biban Pahelwan, 1984 Cr LJ 350 , burden as to good faith.
77. U Aung Pe, (1938) Ran 404 (FB).
78. Jatish Chandra v Hari Sadhan, AIR 1961 SC 613 [LNIND 1961 SC 19] .
79. Jawaharlal Darda v Manoharao Ganpatrao, AIR 1998 SC 2117 [LNIND 1998 SC 361] : 1998 Cr
LJ 2928
80. Chandrasekhara v Karthikeyan, AIR 1964 Ker 277 [LNIND 1964 KER 90] . Neelakantan
Kamalasanan v Achutan, 1988 Cr LJ 1212 (Ker).
81. Janardhan Damodhar Dikshit, (1894) 19 Bom 703.
82. Deivasigamani, 1977 Cr LJ NOC 110 (Mad).
83. Ramanand v State, (1881) 3 All 664 .
84. Umed Singh, (1923) 46 All 64 . Dissented in Sukhdayal v Saraswati, (936) Nag 217.
85. Rajendra Vishwanath Chaudhary v Nayantara Durgadas Vasudeo, 2012 Cr LJ 1363 (Bom).
86. E I Howard v M Mull, (1866) 1 BHC (Appx) 1xxxv, xci. Thus, the truth of the matter has not to
be proved literally. It is sufficient if the imputation is proved to be substantially true. 1989 Cr LJ
1022 . Following Murlidhar v Narayandas, AIR 1914 Sind 85 : 1915-16 Cr LJ 141 ; Surajmal Mehta
v Horniman, AIR 1917 Bom 62 . Where it is stressed that even an exaggeration will not by itself
defeat this defence; Purushottam Vijay v State of MP, AIR 1961 MP 205 [LNIND 1960 MP 59] DB :
1961 (2) Cr LJ 114 where it is observed :
The statement of fact need only be substantially correct and need not be microscopically or
photographically true : nor can the prosecutor fasten himself on to an inaccuracy in the detail unless
the detail itself is such as to make substantial difference to the case.
87. Khare v Massani, (1943) Nag 347.
88. Radhelal Mangalal Jaiswal v Sheshrao Anandrao Lad, 2011 Cr LJ 2233 (Bom).
89. Kartar Singh, (1956) SCR 476 [LNIND 1956 SC 39] . Relying upon and citing the
observations of Lord Cockburn in Saymour v Butterworth, (1862) 3 F&F 372 and dicta of judges
in R. v Sir R Garden, (1879) 5 QBD 1 . Followed in Radhanath Rath (Dr) v Biraja Prasad Rai, 1992 Cr
LJ 938 (Ori), where the editor and publisher of a newspaper were held not liable as they
happened to include a defamatory matter relying upon their reporter who had been a
trustworthy journalist.
90. Arundhati Roy Re, 2002 Cr LJ 1792 : AIR 2002 SC 1375 [LNIND 2002 SC 174] (para 24).
91. Ibid.
92. McLeod, (1880) 3 All 342 .
93. T Kunhambu v A Sojath, 1989 Cr LJ 1022 (Ker). See also Dagar Singh v Shobha Gupta, 1998
Cr LJ 1541 (P&H).
94. Shatrughna Pd Sinha v Rajbhan Surajmal Rathi, 1997 Cr LJ 212 : (1996) 6 SCC 263 (SC).
95. Tata Press Ltd v Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd, (1995) 5 SCC 139) [LNIND 1995 SC 755] :
AIR 1995 SC 2438 [LNIND 1995 SC 755] .
96. Godrej Sara Lee Ltd v Reckitt Benckiser (I) Ltd, (2006 (32) PTC 307) : ( 2006 CLC 1105 ).
97. Nippon Sheet Glass Co Ltd v Raman Fibre Sciences Pvt Ltd, 2011 Cr LJ 2702 (Kar).
98. Kimber v The Press Association, (1893) 1 QB 65 , 68.
99. J Wright, (1799) 8 TR 293, 298.
100. Kimber v The Press Association, supra.
101. Usill v Hales, (1878) 3 CPD 319 .
102. Clement, (1821) 4 B & Ald. 218.
103. Hicklin, (1868) LR 3 QB 360.
104. Carlile, (1819) 3 B & Ald. 167.
105. Singaraju Nagabhushanam, (1902) 26 Mad 464; Maksud Saiyed v State of Gujarat, (2005) 5
SCC 668 : (2007) 140 COMP CASES 590.
106. Woodgate v Ridout, (1865) 4 F&F 202, 216. See also Harbans Singh v State of Rajasthan,
1998 Cr LJ 433 (Raj), the word "shatir" might be of offending nature and objectionable but not
necessarily defamatory. The order dropping the proceedings was not interfered with.
107. Abdool Wadood, (1907) 9 Bom LR 230 [LNIND 1907 BOM 6] , 31 Bom 293. See
Ranganayakamma v K Venugopala Rao, 1987 Cr LJ 2000 (AP), the complainant's foreword to a
book was criticised by imputing words to the complainant himself which lacked good faith and
showed malice.
108. Note R, p 183.
109. Sankara v State, (1883) 6 Mad 381, 395, 396.
110. ADM Stubbings v Shella Muthu, 1972 Cr LJ 968 (Ker).
111. Dr. Vishnu Dutt Agarwal v State of UP, 2012 Cr LJ 3595 (All).
112. Yadav Motiram Patil v Rajiv G Ghodankar, 2011 Cr LJ 528 (Bom).
113. Kanwal Lal, AIR 1963 SC 1317 [LNIND 1962 SC 322] .
114. See Damodra Shenoi v PP Ernakulam, 1989 Cr LJ 2398 where it is stressed that the
accused must prove by preponderance of probability that he laboured under good faith as
defined in section 52, IPC.
115. J Sudershan v R Sankaran, 1992 Cr LJ 2427 (Mad). The court referred to MC Verugheese v
TJ Ponnan, AIR 1970 SC 1876 [LNIND 1968 SC 339] .
116. MA Rumugam v Kittu alias Krishnamoorthy, (2009) 1 SCC (Cr) 245 : AIR 2009 SC 341
[LNIND 2008 SC 2186] ; Rallis India Ltd v K T Vijay Kumar, 2010 Cr LJ 2485 (AP); Nayana Jaikisan
Tekwani v State of Maharashtra, 2010 Cr LJ 4094 (Bom).
117. Kanwal Lal, AIR 1963 SC 1317 [LNIND 1962 SC 322] .
118. Chamanlal, (1970) 3 SCR 913 [LNIND 1970 SC 106] .
119. Vedurumudi Rama Rao v Chennuri Venkat Rao, 1997 Cr LJ 3851 (AP).
120. Standard Chartered Bank v Vinay Kumar Sood, 2010 Cr LJ 1277 (Del).
121. Mrs. Jinnat Ara Borbora, 1980 Cr LJ NOC (Gau).
122. Sewakram v RK Karanjia, 1981 Cr LJ 894 (SC) : AIR 1981 SC 514 : 1514 : (1981) 3 SCC 208
[LNIND 1981 SC 265] .
123. Muhammad Gul v Haji Fazley Karim, (1929) 56 Cal 1013 .
124. Karuppusamy, 1974 Cr LJ 33 (Mad).
125. Chamanlal, supra; see also Sukra Mahato v Basudeo Kumar, 1971 Cr LJ 1168 (SC);
Prayagdutt, 1977 Cr LJ 1258 (MP).
126. Pratibha (Dr.) v State of Maharashtra, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 997 (Bom).
127. P Swaminathan v Lakshmanan, 1992 Cr LJ 990 (Mad).
128. Yadav Motiram Patil v Rajiv G Ghodankar, 2011 Cr LJ 528 (Bom).
129. Beckett v Norris, (1945) Mad 749.
130. Virji Bhagwan, (1909) 11 Bom LR 638 .
131. Vinayak Atmaram v Shantaram Janardan, (1941) 43 Bom LR 737 .
132. Cooppoosami Chetty v Duraisami Chetty, (1909) 33 Mad 67.
133. Abdul Hakim v Tej Chandar Mukarji, (1881) 3 All 815 .
134. Baboo Gunnesh Dutt Singh v Mugneeram Chowdhry, (1872) 11 Beng LR 321 (PC).
135. Satish Chandra Chakravarti v Ram Doyal De, (1920) 48 Cal 388 (SB).
136. Karu Singh, (1926) 7 PLT 587 .
137. Sukhdeo Vithal Pansare, 1974 Cr LJ 1435 (Bom); see also Jiban Krishna Das, 1983 Cr LJ
NOC 39 (Cal).
138. Parameswara v Krishna Pillai, AIR 1966 Ker 264 [LNIND 1966 KER 11] .
139. Bai Shanta v Umrao Amir, (1925) 50 Bom 162 : 28 Bom LR 1 (FB), overruling Babaji, (1892)
17 Bom 127, and Balkrishna Vithal, (1893) 17 Bom 573.
140. Ganga Prasad, (1907) 29 All 685 (FB); Isuri Prasad Singh v Umrao Singh, (1900) 22 All 234 .
141. Chotelal v Phulchand, (1937) Nag 425.
142. Hemraj v Babulal, AIR 1962 MP 241 [LNIND 1961 MP 92] .
143. Bai Shanta v Umrao Amir, (1925) 50 Bom 162 : 28 Bom LR 1 (FB). Denial of the relationship
of husband and wife in an eviction proceeding between the tenant and complainant was held to
be not defamatory, Girish Kakkar v Dr. (Mrs.) Dhanwantri, 1991 Cr LJ 5 (Del). If the words are
defamatory, the proceedings cannot be stayed because it is for the court to decide whether a
privilege is available or not. Pravinchand v Ibrahim Md, 1987 Cr LJ 1795 (Bom).
144. G Janardhana Reddy v A Narayana Reddy, 2010 Cr LJ 2660 (AP).
145. Tiruvengada Mudali v Tripurasundari Ammal, (1926) 49 Mad 728, FB overruling Venkata
Reddy, (1912) 36 Mad 216 (FB).
146. Karu Singh, (1926) 7 PLT 587 : 27 Cr LJ 1320, following Kari Singh, (1912) 40 Cal 433 .
147. Narendra Kapoor v Ramesh C Bansal, 1998 Cr LJ 1863 (Del).
148. MC Vergheese v TJ Poonan, AIR 1970 SC 1876 [LNIND 1968 SC 339] : 1970 Cr LJ 1651 .
149. The court also distinguished the present case from its earlier decision in Rev Fr Bernard v
Ramachandran Pillai, 1986 Ker LT 1240 : 1987 Cr LJ 739 where in addition to the reply to the
complainant's counsel, the accused spread the rumour in the locality about his alleged pilferage
as an employee.
150. Rajnarain Sein, (1870) 6 Beng LR (Appx) 42 : 14 WR (Cr) 22.
151. Fr. Thomas Maniankerikalam v Thomas J Padiyath, 2003 Cr LJ 945 .
152. Pat Sharpe Mrs. v Dwijendra Nath, (1964) 1 Cr LJ 367 . M S Jayaraj v Commissioner of
Excise, Kerala, (2000) 7 SCC 552 [LNIND 2000 SC 2302] : AIR 2000 SC 3266 [LNIND 2000 KER
461] - 'person aggrieved'- meaning
153. U Aung Pe, (1938) Ran 404 (FB).
154. Homen Boroghain v Brahmaputra Valley Regional Handloom Weavers' Co-op Society, (1995)
2 Cr LJ 2357 (Gau). Viswanath v Shambhu Nath, 1995 Cr LJ 277 (All) a complaint by a member
of the community which was defamed in general, not maintainable. The complainant was not
personally hurt. MP Narayna Pillai v MP Chacko, 1986 Cr LJ 2002 (Ker) a member of the
Christian community could not complain of a general remark against the community KM
Mathew v TU Balan, 1985 Cr LJ 1039 (Ker), remarks about teachers on strike, a leader could not
complain.
155. KV Ramesh v HC Ramesh, 2001 Cr LJ 3556 (Kant).
156. Ratan Singh v Chain Singh, 2000 Cr LJ 2736 (Raj).
157. Sasikurnar B Menon v S Vijayan, 1998 Cr LJ 3973 (Ker).
158. S Khushboo v Kanniammal, 2010 Cr LJ 2828 (SC) : AIR 2010 SC 3196 [LNIND 2010 SC 411]
: 2010 (5) SCC 600 [LNIND 2010 SC 411] ; Charmesh Sharma v State Of Rajasthan, 2012 Cr LJ
2115 (Raj).
159. John Thomas v Dr. K Jagdeesan, AIR 2001 SC 2651 [LNIND 2001 SC 1323] .
160. Swamy Anoopananda v Bagmisri, 2000 Cr LJ 4296 (Ori).
161. Beem Singh v S Ramayajam, 2003 Cr LJ NOC 61 (Mad) : 2002 Mad LJ (Ori) 351.
162. Ibid.
163. Beauchamp v Moore, (1902) 26 Mad 43.
164. Rallis India Ltd v K T Vijay Kumar, 2010 Cr LJ 2485 (AP).
165. Chief Education Officer, Salem v K S Palanichamy, 2012 Cr LJ 2543 (Mad). See other view in
Rallis India Ltd v K T Vijay Kumar, 2010 Cr LJ 2485 (AP) discussed above.
166. Subhash K Shah v K Shankar Bhat, 1993 Cr LJ 1296 (Kant).
167. Subhash K Shah v K Shankar Bhat, 1993 Cr LJ 1296 .
168. Pyarelal Maganlal Jaiswal v State of Maharashtra, 1996 Cr LJ 989 (Bom).
169. MN Damani v SK Sinha, AIR 2001 SC 2037 [LNIND 2001 SC 1149] . Rajesh Rangarajan v
Crop Care Fed. of India, 2010 (9) Scale 23 [LNIND 2010 SC 626] -Proceedings quashed.
170. Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande, v Uttam, 1999 Cr LJ 1620 : AIR 1999 SC 1028 [LNIND 1999
SC 136] .
171. G Janardhana Reddy v A Narayana Reddy, 2010 Cr LJ 2660 ; AP Ramoji Rao, Chairman
Ramoji Group of Companies v State of AP, AIR 2006 SC 3384 [LNIND 2006 SC 820] : (2006) 8
SCC 321) [LNIND 2006 SC 820] - proceedings quashed since the accused agreed to give a
clarification in the TV channel as the news item was not the intended in any manner to defame
or harm the reputation of the Chief Minister or his entourage of ministers and officials.
172. Vedurumudi Rama Rao v Chennuri Venkat Rao, 1997 Cr LJ 3851 .
173. Darusing Durgasing v State of Gujarat, 1999 Cr LJ 1620 : AIR 1999 SC 1028 [LNIND 1999 SC
136] .
174. Valmiki Faleiro v Mrs. Lauriana Fernandes, 2005 Cr LJ 2498 .
175. Jeffrey J Diermeier v State of WB, (2010) 6 SCC 243 [LNIND 2010 SC 512] : (2010) 3
SCC(Cr) 138.
176. KM Mathew v KA Abraham, 1998 Cr LJ 327 (Ker).
177. Subhiksha Trading Services Ltd v Azim H Premji, 2011 Cr LJ 2769 (Mad).
178. Shiv Kumar Agarwal v State of Meghalaya, 2013 Cr LJ 421 .
179. Shiv Kumar Agarwal v State of Meghalaya, 2013 Cr LJ 421 .
180. Abhijit Pawar v Hemant Madhukar Nimbalkar, AIR 2017 SC 299 [LNIND 2016 SC 614] :
(2017)3 SCC 528 [LNIND 2016 SC 614] .
181. Bir Chandra Das v Anil Kumar Sarkar, 2011 Cr LJ 3422 (Cal).