Robbery.
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion.
When theft is robbery.
Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the
theft, or in carrying away1 or attempting to carry away property obtained by the
theft, the offender, for that end,2 voluntarily causes3 or attempts to cause to any
person4 death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant
hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint.
When extortion is robbery.
Extortion is "robbery" if the offender, at the time of committing the extortion, is in
the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that
person in fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to
that person or to some other person, and, by so putting in fear, induces the person
so put in fear then and there to deliver up the thing extorted.
Explanation.—The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the
other person in fear of instant death, or instant hurt, or of instant wrongful
restraint.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A holds Z down and fraudulently takes Z's money and jewels from Z's clothes
without Z's consent. Here A has committed theft, and in order to the committing
of that theft, has voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore
committed robbery.
(b) A meets Z on the highroads, shows a pistol, and demands Z's purse. Z in
consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z by
putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at the time of committing the
extortion in his presence. A has therefore committed robbery.
(c) A meets Z and Z's child on the highroad. A takes the child and threatens to fling
it down a precipice, unless Z delivers his purse. Z, in consequence delivers his
purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant
hurt to the child who is there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z.
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying—"Your child is in the hands of my gang, and
will be put to death unless you send us ten thousand rupees". This is extortion,
and punishable as such; but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant
death of his child.
COMMENT—
Robbery is a special and aggravated form of either theft or extortion. The chief
distinguishing element in robbery is the presence of imminent fear of violence. The
second para distinguishes robbery from theft, the third distinguishes it from extortion.
[s 390.1] Object.—
The authors of the Code observe: "There can be no case of robbery which does not fall
within the definition either of theft or of extortion; but in practice it will perpetually be a
matter of doubt whether a particular act of robbery was a theft or extortion. A large
proportion of robberies will be half theft, half extortion. A seizes Z, threatens to murder
him, unless he delivers all his property, and begins to pull off Z's ornaments. Z in terror
begs that A will take all he has, and spare his life, assists in taking off his ornaments,
and delivers them to A. Here, such ornaments as A took without Z's consent are taken
by theft. Those which Z delivered up from fear of death are acquired by extortion. It is
by no means improbable that Z's right-arm bracelet may have been obtained by theft,
and left-arm bracelet by extortion; that the rupees in Z's girdle may have been obtained
by theft, and those in his turban by extortion. Probably in nine-tenths of the robberies
which are committed, something like this actually takes place, and it is probable that a
few minutes later neither the robber nor the person robbed would be able to recollect in
what proportions theft and extortion were mixed in the crime; nor is it at all necessary
for the ends of justice that this should be ascertained. For though, in general the
consent of a sufferer is a circumstance which vary materially modifies the character of
the offence, and which ought, therefore, to be made known to the Courts, yet the
consent which a person gives to the taking of his property by a ruffian who holds a
pistol to his breast is a circumstance altogether immaterial".140.
The Explanation and illustrations (b) and (c) mark the distinction between simple
extortion and extortion which is robbery. Illustration (a) indicates when theft is robbery.
An analysis of section 390 IPC, 1860 would show that in order that theft may constitute
robbery, prosecution has to establish:
(a) if in order to the committing of theft; or
(b) in committing the theft; or
(c) in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by theft; or
(d) the offender for that end i.e. any of the ends contemplated by (a) to (c); or
(e) voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful
restraint or fear of instant death or of instant hurt or instant wrongful restraint.
In other words, theft would only be robbery if for any of the ends mentioned in (a) to (c)
the offender voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or
wrongful restraint or fear of instant death or of instant hurl or instant wrongful restraint.
If the ends does not fall within (a) to (c) but, the offender still causes or attempts to
cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or fear of instant death or of
instant hurt or instant wrongful restraint, the offence would not be robbery. The Court
emphasised that (a) or (b) or (c) have to be read conjunctively with (d) and (e). It is only
when (a) or (b) or (c) co-exist with (d) and (e) or there is a nexus between any of them
and (d) and (e) would theft amount to robbery.141.
[s 390.2] Theft, extortion and robbery.—
Theft or extortion when caused with violence causing death or fear of death, hurt or
wrongful restraint is robbery. When there is no theft, as a natural corollary, there cannot
be robbery. Robbery is only an aggravated form of theft or extortion. Aggravation is in
the use of violence causing death or fear of death, hurt or restraint. Violence must be in
the course of theft and not subsequently. Also, it is not necessary that violence should
actually be committed, even attempt to commit it is enough.142.
1. 'Carrying away'.—Even if death, hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of any of these, is
caused after committing theft, in order to carry away the property obtained by theft,
this offence would be committed.
2. 'For that end'.—Death, hurt or wrongful restraint must be caused in committing theft,
or in carrying away property obtained by theft. The expression "for that end" clearly
means that the hurt caused by the offender must be with the object of facilitating the
committing of theft or must be caused while the offender is committing theft or is
carrying away or is attempting to carry away property obtained by theft.143. Where a
person caused hurt only to avoid capture when surprised while stealing144. it was held
that theft, and not robbery, was committed. The use of violence will not convert the
offence of theft into robbery, unless the violence is committed for one of the ends
specified in this section. Where the accused abandoned the property obtained by theft
and threw stones at his pursuer to deter him from continuing the pursuit, it was held
that the accused was guilty of theft and not of robbery.145. The victim was relieved of
his watch in a running train by one of the two accused who were associates in crime.
As the snatcher was trying to get down from the train, the victim raised alarm.
Whereupon the second accused gave a slap to the victim. It was held that the hurt
caused was directly related to the theft i.e., to facilitate carrying away of the property
obtained by theft and as such the accused were rightly convicted under section 392,
IPC, 1860.146.
3. 'Voluntarily causes'.—These words denote that an accidental infliction of injury by a
thief will not convert his offence into robbery. Thus, where a person while cutting a
string, by which a basket was tied, with intent to steal it, accidentally cut the wrist of the
owner, who at the moment tried to seize and keep the basket, and ran away with it, it
was held that the offence committed was theft and not robbery.147. But where in
committing theft, there is indubitably an intention seconded by an attempt to cause
hurt, the offence is robbery.148. In order to make an offence of theft a robbery there
must be either theft and injury or threat of injury while committing theft.149.
4. 'Person'.—The word 'person' cannot be so narrowly construed as to exclude the dead
body of a human being who was killed in the course of the same transaction in which
theft was committed.150.
[s 390.3] CASES.—
Where participation of the accused, was not explained by the prosecution and there
were contradictions in the evidence of prosecution witnesses, the Court acquitted the
accused.151.
The accused sprinkled chilli powder in the eyes of certain persons and snatched their
attaches containing cash. The evidence of persons who were carrying was found to be
reliable. Cash was recovered as a result of disclosures made by the accused.
Presumption under section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 applied. The accused
was accordingly convicted.152.
140. Note N, p 162.
141. State of Maharashtra v Joseph Mingel Koli, 1997 (2) Crimes 228 [LNIND 1996 BOM 667]
(Bom.).
142. Venu v State of Karnataka, (2008) 3 SCC 94 [LNIND 2008 SC 208] : (2008) 1 SCC (Cr) 623 :
AIR 2008 SC 1199 [LNIND 2008 SC 208] : 2008 Cr LJ 1634 .
143. Venu v State of Karnataka, (2008) 3 SCC 94 [LNIND 2008 SC 208] : AIR 2008 SC 1199
[LNIND 2008 SC 208] : 2008 Cr LJ 1634 .
144. Kalio Kerio, (1872) Unrep Cr C 65.
145. (1865) 1 Weir 442; Kalio Kiero, sup.
146. Harish Chandra, 1976 Cr LJ 1168 : AIR 1976 SC 1430 : (1976) 2 SCC 795 .
147. Edwards, (1843) 1 Cox 32.
148. Teekai Bheer, (1866) 5 WR (Cr) 95.
149. Padmanava Mohapatra, 1983 Cr LJ NOC 238 (Ori). Proved case of robbery and murder.
State of Kerala v Naduvectil Vishwanathan, 1991 Cr LJ 1501 .
150. Jamnadas, AIR 1963 MP 106 [LNIND 1962 MP 173] .
151. Prabhat Marak v State of Tripura, 2011 Cr LJ 1844 (Gau).
152. Rameshwar Soni v State of MP, 1997 Cr LJ 3418 (MP). As to when theft becomes robbery
see State of Maharashtra v Vinayak Tukaram, 1997 Cr LJ 3988 (Bom), here the accused snatched
three gold buttons from the shirt of the victim at a railway platform. He gave a knife blow on
being caught. Convicted for robbery. The Court said that it could not be contended that he gave
the knife blow only to extricate himself from the clutches of the person holding him and to
ensure the taking away of the stolen gold buttons.