Sale of adulterated drugs.
Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been adulterated in such a
manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary for
medicinal purposes as unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes
by any person not knowing of the adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
State Amendments
Orissa.—1. Same as in section 272, the amendments were made by Orissa Act No. 3 of
1999, s. 2.
Uttar Pradesh.—1. The following amendments were made by U.P. Act No. 47 of 1975, s.
2(iv), (w.e.f. 15-9-1975).
In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh in S. 275, for the words, "shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both, substitute
the following words.—
"shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for
life."
2. The offence is cognizable, non-bailable and triable by Court of Session, vide U.P. Act
No. 47 of 1975.
West Bengal.—1. The following amendments were made by W.B. Act No. 42 of 1973, s.
3(iv) (w.e.f. 29-4-1973).
In its application to the State of West Bengal in s. 275, for the words "of either
description for a term which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both",
substitute the words "for life with or without fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for
life."
2. The offence is cognizable, non-bailable and triable by Court of Session, vide W.B. Act
No. 34 of 1974.
COMMENT.—
The offence under this section consists in selling, or offering, or exposing for sale, or
issuing from any dispensary, an adulterated drug as unadulterated. This section not
only prohibits the sale of an adulterated drug but also its issue from any dispensary.
For local amendment, see comment under section 272 ante.