Assisting in concealment of stolen property.
Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or disposing of or making away with
property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
three years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT—
This section requires two things—
1. Voluntary assistance in concealing or disposing of or making away with property.
2. Knowledge or reason to believe that such property is stolen property.
The section is intended to penalise the person, who deal with stolen property in such a
way that it becomes difficult to identify it or use it as evidence. It is not necessary to
establish that the property was the subject matter of any particular theft. It would
suffice if the prosecution can establish that the accused had knowledge or "had reason
to believe" that the property is stolen one. All that the prosecution is required to
establish is that the accused rendered help in either concealment or disposal of the
property, which he had reason to believe to be stolen property or had knowledge to
believe that it was such.468. It is not necessary for a person to be convicted under this
section that another person must be traced out and convicted of an offence of
committing theft. The prosecution has simply to establish that the property recovered
is stolen property and that the accused provided help in its concealment and
disposal.469.
[s 414.1] CASES.—
The accused was the driver of a taxi, which was carrying several persons who had hired
it. While on its way the taxi stopped at a place for some reason, not known, and two of
the passengers got down from the taxi and within a distance of about three and a half
yards from the taxi they suddenly and without premeditation attacked, injured and
robbed a man of his purse containing about Rs. 50. The robbers then boarded the taxi
and the driver, in spite of the cries of the victim, drove away as fast as he could. It was
held that the driver assisted the robbers in making away with the money so robbed and
was guilty under this section.470. A person who helps the disposal of stolen property by
buying the same himself has been held to be guilty of the offence under the
section.471.
468. Sayyed Issaq v State of Maharashtra, 2008 Cr LJ 2950 (Bom).
469. Ajendranath, AIR 1964 SC 170 [LNIND 1963 SC 126] : (1964) 1 Cr LJ 129 .
470. Hari Singh, (1940) 2 Cal 9 .
471. Bhanwarlal v State of Rajasthan, (1995) 1 Cr LJ 625 (Raj).