Lurking house-trespass.
Whoever commits house-trespass having taken precautions to conceal such house-
trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the trespasser from
the building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said to commit
"lurking house-trespass".
COMMENT—
The authors of the Code say: "House-trespass, again, may be aggravated by being
committed in a surreptitious or in a violent manner. The former aggravated form of
house-trespass we designate as lurking house-trespass; the latter we designate as
house-breaking. Again, house-trespass, in every form, may be aggravated by the time at
which it is committed. Trespass of this sort has, for obvious reasons, always been
considered as a more serious offence when committed by night than when committed
by day. Thus, we have four aggravated forms of that sort of criminal trespass which we
designate as house-trespass, lurking house-trespass, house-breaking, lurking house-
trespass by night, and house-breaking by night".
"These are aggravations arising from the way in which the criminal trespass is
committed. But criminal trespass may also be aggravated by the end for which it is
committed. It may be committed for a frolic. It may be committed in order to (commit)
a murder. It may also often happen that a criminal trespass which is venial, as respects
the mode, may be of the greatest enormity as respects the end; and that a criminal
trespass committed in the most reprehensible mode may be committed for an end of
no great atrocity. Thus, A may commit house-breaking by night for the purpose of
playing some idle trick on the inmates of a dwelling. B may commit simple criminal
trespass by merely entering another's field for the purpose of murder or gang-robbery.
Here A commits trespass in the worst way. B commits trespass with the worst object.
In our provisions we have endeavoured to combine the aggravating circumstances in
such a way that each may have its due effect in settling the punishment.681. The law is
well settled that unless the accused is alleged to have taken some active steps and
means to conceal his presence, the allegation that the house-trespass was committed
by night and the darkness helped the accused in concealing his presence, does not and
cannot justify a charge for the offence of committing lurking house-trespass. But if the
house-trespass is a lurking house-trespass" as defined in section 443, IPC, 1860,
because of the offender having taken some active steps to conceal his presence, it
becomes automatically lurking house-trespass by night under section 444, IPC, 1860, if
it is committed after sunset and before sunrise.682.
[s 443.1] CASES.—
Entry upon the roof of a building may be criminal trespass. But it cannot sustain a
conviction for lurking house-trespass,683. or for house-breaking.684.
681. Note N, p 168.
682. Prem Bahadur, 1978 Cr LJ 945 (Sikkim); see also Dasai Kandu, 1979 Cr LJ NOC 110 (Pat);
Bejoy Kumar Mohapatra, 1982 Cr LJ 2162 (Ori).
683. Alla Bakhsh, (1886) PR No. 9 of 1887.
684. Fazla, (1890) PR No. 9 of 1890.