Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine.
If, before the expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment, such
a proportion of the fine be paid or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in
default of payment is not less than proportional to the part of the fine still unpaid, the
imprisonment shall terminate.
ILLUSTRATION
A is sentenced to a fine of one hundred rupees and to four months' imprisonment in
default of payment. Here, if seventy-five rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the
expiration of one month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the first
month has expired. If seventy-five rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration
of the first month, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be
immediately discharged. If fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration
of two months of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the two months
are completed. If fifty rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of those two
months, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately
discharged.
COMMENT—
If the fine imposed on an accused is paid or levied while he is imprisoned for default of
payment, his imprisonment will immediately terminate: and if a proportion of the fine
be paid during the imprisonment, a proportional abatement of the imprisonment will
take place. The Court has, however, no power to refund fine. If the time limit had been
set by the Court for payment of fine and the fine amount is not paid within the time so
fixed, then it goes without saying that the petitioner-accused has to either surrender
before the Court or the prosecuting agency will be in a position to arrest him and
produce before Court for his detention in prison for undergoing the default
sentence.216. In case of default in payment of fine accused not obeying specific
directions as to making payment and postponing payment without surrendering into
Court. Accused is guilty of abuse of process of Court.217.
216. Prahalad Singh v State of M P, 2009 Cr LJ 3161 (MP).
217. Ram Lakhan v The State, 1986 Cr LJ 617 (All).