Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give
assistance.
Whoever, being bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public servant in
the execution of his public duty, intentionally omits to give such assistance, shall be
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both;
and if such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally competent to
make such demand for the purposes of executing any process lawfully issued by a
Court of Justice, or of preventing the commission of an offence, or of suppressing a
riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or guilty of an offence, or of
having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees, or with both.
COMMENT—
This section provides, first in general terms for the punishment when a person, being
bound by law to render assistance to a public servant in the execution of his public
duty, intentionally omits to assist; and second, for the punishment when the assistance
is demanded for certain specified purposes.112.
This section speaks of assistance to be rendered to public servants, just as sections
176 and 177 speak of furnishing true information. A case was registered against the
accused/ Sub-Inspector of Police under section 187 of the IPC, 1860 for not assisting
the Assisting Sessions Judge, in the service of summons to witnesses and
administration of justice. In the light of the language employed in sections 195(1) of Cr
PC, 1973, the prosecution initiated at the instance of the Assistant Sessions Judge
cannot be sustained for the reason that the Sub-Inspector of Police is not subordinate
to the said Officer. Unless a complaint is made by the competent officer as specified
under section 195(1) of the Code, the prosecution cannot be further proceeded with.
Apart from this aspect of the matter, in as much as the service of summons, being in
discharge of the official duties of the Sub-Inspector, sanction under section 197 of the
code is also required.113.
112. Ramaya Naika, (1903) 26 Mad 419, (FB).
113. Paleti Anil Babu v State, 2006 Cr LJ 3084 (AP).