Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention.
When a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the common
intention 1 of all, each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it
were done by him alone.]
COMMENT—
Introduction.—Ordinarily, no man can be held responsible for an independent act and
wrong committed by another. However, section 34 of the IPC, 1860 makes an exception
to this principle. It lays down a principle of joint liability in the doing of a criminal act.
The essence of that liability is to be found in the existence of common intention,
animating the accused leading to the doing of a criminal act in furtherance of such
intention. It deals with the doing of separate acts, similar or adverse by several
persons, if all are done in furtherance of common intention. In such situation, each
person is liable for the result of that as if he had done that act himself.171. The soul of
section 34, IPC, 1860 is the joint liability in doing a criminal act.172.
[s 34.1] History.—
Section 34 IPC, 1860 is part of the original Code of 1860 as drafted by Lord Macaulay.
The original section as it stood was "When a criminal act is done by several persons,
each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if the act was done by
him alone." However, on account of certain observations made by Sir Barnes Peacock,
CJ, in Queen v Gora Chand Gope,173. it was necessary to bring about a change in the
wordings of the section. Accordingly, in the year 1870 an amendment was brought
which introduced the following words after "when a criminal act is done by several
persons..." "…in furtherance of the common intention...". After this change, the section
has not been changed or amended ever.
[s 34.2] Object.—
The provision is intended to meet a case in which it may be difficult to distinguish
between acts of individual members of a party who act in furtherance of the common
intention of all or to prove exactly what part was taken by each of them. The true
contents of the section are that if two or more persons intentionally do an act jointly,
the position in law is just the same as if each of them has done it individually by
himself. As observed in Ashok Kumar v State of Punjab,174. the existence of a common
intention amongst the participants in a crime is the essential element for application of
this section. It is not necessary that the acts of the several persons charged with
commission of an offence jointly must be the same or identically similar. The acts may
be different in character, but must have been actuated by one and the same common
intention in order to attract the provision.175. Barendra Kumar Ghosh v King Emperor,176.
stated the true purport of section 34 as:
The words of s.34 are not to be eviscerated by reading them in this exceedingly limited
sense. By s.33 a criminal act in s.34 includes a series of acts and, further, 'act' includes
omission to act, for example, an omission to interfere in order to prevent a murder being
done before one's very eyes. By s.37, when any offence is committed by means of several
acts whoever intentionally cooperates in the commission of that offence by doing any one
of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, commits that offence. Even if the
appellant did nothing as he stood outside the door, it is to be remembered that in crimes as
in other things 'they also serve who only stand and wait'.177.
[s 34.3] Principle.—
This section is only a rule of evidence and does not create a substantive offence.
Section 34 IPC, 1860 lays down the principle of constructive liability. The essence of
section 34 IPC, 1860 is a simultaneous consensus of the minds of the persons
participating in criminal action to bring about a particular result. Section 34 IPC, 1860
stipulates that the act must have been done in furtherance of the common intention. In
fact, the section is intended to cover a case where a number of persons act together
and on the facts of the case it is not possible for the prosecution to prove as to which
of the persons who acted together actually committed the crime. Little or no distinction
exists between a charge for an offence under a particular section and a charge under
that section read with section 34.178. Therefore, section 34, IPC, 1860, would apply
even if no charge is framed under that section provided of course from the evidence it
becomes clear that there was pre-arranged plan to achieve the commonly intended
object.179. Thus, where six persons were charged under sections 148, 302/149 and
307/149, IPC, 1860, but two were acquitted, the remaining four accused could be
convicted on the charges of murder and attempt to murder with the aid of section 34 of
the Penal Code.180. This section really means that if two or more persons intentionally
do a thing jointly, it is just the same as if each of them had done it individually.181. If the
criminal act was a fresh and independent act springing wholly from the mind of the
doer, the others are not liable merely because when it was done they were intending to
be partakers with the doer in a different criminal act.
[s 34.4] Scope, ambit and applicability.—
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code recognises the principle of vicarious liability in
criminal jurisprudence. The said principle enshrined under Section 34 of the Code
would be attracted only if one or more than one accused person act conjointly in the
commission of offence with others. It is not necessary that all such persons should be
named and identified before the liability under Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code can
be invoked. So long as the evidence brought by the prosecution would disclose that
one or more accused persons had acted in concert with other persons not named or
identified, the liability under Section 34 of the Code would still be attracted. Once the
other accused stands acquitted in absence of said evidence, the vicarious liability
under section 34 of the Code would not be attracted so as to hold the accused liable
for the offence with the aid of Section 34 of the Code. However, the accused would still
be liable for the offence if the injury or injuries leading to offence can be attributed to
him.182. A bare reading of this section shows that the section could be dissected as
follows:
(a) Criminal act is done by several persons;
(b) Such act is done in furtherance of the common intention of all; and
(c) Each of such persons is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done
by him alone.
(d) But, it is not necessary that all such persons should be named and identified
before the liability under Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code can be invoked.183.
In other words, these three ingredients would guide the court in determining whether an
accused is liable to be convicted with the aid of section 34. While first two are the acts
which are attributable and have to be proved as actions of the accused, the third is the
consequence. Once the criminal act and common intention are proved, then by fiction
of law, criminal liability of having done that act by each person individually would arise.
The criminal act, according to section 34 IPC, 1860 must be done by several persons.
The emphasis in this part of the section is on the word "done".184. The section does not
envisage the separate act by all the accused persons for becoming responsible for the
ultimate criminal act. If such an interpretation is accepted, the purpose of section 34
shall be rendered infructuous.185. Under section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, a pre-
concert in the sense of a distinct previous plan is not necessary to be proved.186. It is a
well settled law that mere presence or association with other members is not per se
sufficient to hold each of them criminally liable for the offences committed by the other
members, unless there is sufficient evidence on record to show that one such member
also intends to or knows the likelihood of commission of such an offending act.187.
[s 34.5] Three leading Cases.—
The case of Barendra Kumar Ghosh v King Emperor,188. is a locus classicus and has
been followed by number of High Courts and the Supreme Court in a large number of
cases. In this case, the Judicial Committee dealt with the scope of section 34 dealing
with the acts done in furtherance of the common intention, making all equally liable for
the results of all the acts of others. It was observed that section 34 when it speaks of a
criminal act done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, has
regard not to the offence as a whole, but to the criminal act, that is to say, the totality of
the series of acts which result in the offence. In the case of a person assaulted by
many accused, the criminal act is the offence which finally results, though the
achievement of that criminal act may be the result of the action of several persons.
In another celebrated case Mehbub Shah v King-Emperor,189. the court held that:
Section 34 lays down a principle of joint liability in the doing of a criminal act. The section
does not say "the common intentions of all," nor does it say "an intention common to all."
Under the section, the essence of that liability is to be found in the existence of a common
intention animating the accused leading to the doing of a criminal act in furtherance of such
intention. To invoke the aid of s.34 successfully, it must be shown that the criminal act
complained against was done by one of the accused persons in the furtherance of the
common intention of all; if this is shown, then liability for the crime may be imposed on any
one of the persons in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone. This being the
principle, it is clear to their Lordships that common intention within the meaning of the
section implies a pre-arranged plan, and to convict the accused of an offence applying the
section it should be proved that the criminal act was done in concert pursuant to the pre-
arranged plan.
Approving the judgments of the Privy Council in Barendra Kumar Ghosh (Barendra
Kumar Ghosh v King Emperor,190. and Mahbub Shah cases191 a three-Judge Bench of
Supreme Court in Pandurang v State of Hyderabad,192. held that to attract the
applicability of section 34 of the Code the prosecution is under an obligation to
establish that there existed a common intention which requires a pre-arranged plan
because before a man can be vicariously convicted for the criminal act of another, the
act must have been done in furtherance of the common intention of all. The Court had
in mind the ultimate act done in furtherance of the common intention
[s 34.6] Common intention and mens rea.—
Under section 34, every individual offender is associated with the criminal act which
constitutes the offence both physically as well as mentally i.e. he is a participant not
only in what has been described as a common act but also what is termed as the
common intention and, therefore, in both these respects his individual role is put into
serious jeopardy although this individual role might be a part of a common scheme in
which others have also joined him and played a role that is similar or different. But
referring to the common intention, it needs to be clarified that the courts must keep in
mind the fine distinction between "common intention" on the one hand and mens rea as
understood in criminal jurisprudence on the other. Common intention is not alike or
identical to mens rea. The latter may be coincidental with or collateral to the former but
they are distinct and different.193.
[s 34.7] Participation.—
Participation of several persons in some action with the common intention of
committing a crime is an essential ingredient; once such participation is established,
section 34 is at once attracted.194. Thus, the dominant feature of section 34 is the
element of intention and participation in action. This participation need not in all cases
be by physical presence.195. The Supreme Court has held that it is the essence of the
section that the person must be physically present at the actual commission of the
crime. He need not be present in the actual room; he can, for instance, stand guard by a
gate outside ready to warn his companions about any approach of danger or wait in a
car on a nearby road ready to facilitate their escape, but he must be physically present
at the scene of the occurrence and must actually participate in the commission of the
offence in some way or other at the time crime is actually being committed.196.
The Supreme Court has emphasised that proof of participation by acceptable evidence
may in circumstances be a clue to the common intention and that it would not be fatal
to the prosecution case that the culprits had no community of interests.197.
Sometimes, however, absence of actual participation may serve an important purpose
as it happened, for example, where in a love triangle the paramour killed the woman's
husband and she remained sitting with the dead body inside the house without opening
the door. The main accused having been acquitted, the Supreme Court held that the
woman alone could not be convicted under section 302 read with section 34
particularly in view of the fact that the nature of the injuries (gandasa blows with a
heavy hand) made it explicit that they were the handiwork of masculine power and not
that of feminine hands.198. It is also necessary to remember that mere presence of the
offender at the scene of murder without any participation to facilitate the offence is not
enough.199. By merely accompanying the accused one does not become liable for the
crime committed by the accused within the meaning of section 34, IPC, 1860.200. The
degree of participation is also an important factor.201. The court restated the two
ingredients for application of the section which are:
(i) common intention to commit a crime, and
(ii) participation by all the accused in the act or acts in furtherance of the common
intention. These two things establish their joint liability.202.
Where one of the accused persons focussed light on the victim with a torch so as to
enable others to assault him, otherwise it is a dark night. The court said that his
conduct prior and subsequent to the occurrence clearly showed that he shared the
common intention so far as the assault on the deceased was concerned. Hence, he
was rightly roped in under section 34.203. If participation is proved and common
intention is absent, section 34 cannot be invoked.204. The co-accused was standing
outside the house, where the incident took place, while the others committed the
murder. There is no evidence of his having played any part in the crime. He did not even
act as a guard; he did not prevent the witness from entering the house. There is no
evidence of the formation or sharing of any common intention with the other accused.
No weapon was seized from him, nor was any property connected with the crime,
confiscated from him. It was therefore, held that, it was not safe to convict the co-
accused of the offence of murder with the aid of sub-sections 34 and 120(B).205.
[s 34.8] Physical Presence not sine qua non.—
Physical presence at the very spot is not always a necessary ingredient to attract the
action. The Supreme Court decision in Shreekantiah Ramayya v State of Bombay,206. is
the authority for the aforesaid proposition. Vivian Bose, J, speaking for the Bench of
three Judges stated thus:
He need not be present in the actual room; he can, for instance, stand guard by a gate
outside ready to warn his companions about any approach of danger or wait in a car on a
nearby road ready to facilitate their escape.
What is required is his actual participation in the commission of the offence in some
way or other at the time when the crime is actually being committed. The participation
need not in all cases be by physical presence. In offence involving physical violence,
normally presence at the scene of offence may be necessary, but such is not the case
in respect of other offences when the offence consists of diverse acts which may be
done at different times and places. The physical presence at the scene of offence of
the offender sough to be rendered liable under this section is not one of the conditions
of its applicability in every case.207. Even the concept of presence of the co-accused at
the scene is not a necessary requirement to attract section 34 of the IPC, 1860, e.g., the
co-accused can remain a little away and supply weapons to the participating accused
either by throwing or by catapulting them so that the participating accused can inflict
injuries on the targeted person. There may be other provisions in the IPC, 1860 like sub-
sections 120B or 109 which could be invoked then to catch such non-participating
accused. Thus, participation in the crime in furtherance of the common intention is sine
qua non for section 34 IPC, 1860. Exhortation to other accused, even guarding the
scene etc. would amount to participation. Of course, when the allegation against an
accused is that he participated in the crime by oral exhortation or by guarding the
scene the court has to evaluate the evidence very carefully for deciding whether that
person had really done any such act.208.
The absence of any overt act of assault, exhortation or possession of weapon cannot
be singularly determinative of absence of common intention.209.
[s 34.9] In furtherance of common intention.—
The Supreme Court referred to the Oxford English Dictionary where the word
"furtherance" is defined as an "action of helping forward." Russell, in his book on
Criminal Law adopted this definition and said:
It indicates some kind of aid or assistance proceeding an effect in future and that any act
may be regarded as done in furtherance of the ultimate felony if it is a step intentionally
taken for the purpose of effecting the felony." The Supreme Court has also construed the
word "furtherance" as "advancement or promotion.210.
1. 'Common intention'.—The phrase 'common intention' means a pre-oriented plan and
acting in pursuance to the plan. The common intention to give effect to a particular act
may even develop at the spur of moment between a number of persons with reference
to the facts of a given case.211. In Amrik Singh's case it has further been held that
though common intention may develop in course of the fight but there must be clear
and unimpeachable evidence to justify that inference.212. Before a Court can convict a
person for any offence read with section 34, it should come to a definite conclusion
that the said person had a prior concert with one or more other persons, named or
unnamed, for committing the said offence.213. Where the act of murder by the main
accused was facilitated by two others by catching hold of the victim but without
knowing nor having the intention of causing death, it was held that the only common
intention that could be inferred was that of causing grievous hurt.214. Where the
accused had inflicted lathi blows causing injuries only on the eyewitness and not on the
deceased, he could not be said to have shared the common intention of committing
murder of the deceased. He was acquitted for the charge of murder and was convicted
under section 325.215.
Common intention does not mean similar intention of several persons. To constitute
common intention it is necessary that the intention of each one of them be known to
the rest of them and shared by them.216.
What to speak of similar intention even same intention without sharing each other's
intention is not enough for this section.217. In a case like this each will be liable for
whatever injury he caused but none could be vicariously convicted for the act of any of
the others.218. In fine, if common intention cannot be inferred from the evidence of
facts and circumstances of the case, section 34, IPC, 1860, cannot be invoked.219. A
party of farmers was cutting their crop. The deceased took away a portion of the
harvested crop. That night when he was returning from a barat 16 persons waited for
him on the way. They came towards him and the convict who was carrying a knife gave
him a stab wound on the neck which proved fatal. The others did not know that he had
a knife and all of them being with bare hands, it could not be said that they had the
common intention of causing death. They could as well have thought that after
surrounding the accused he would be called upon to return or pay for the harvest taken
away by him.220.A person gifted his land to one of his grandsons. His other son along
with his wife fully armed, the man with a lathi and the woman with a gandasa came to
protest. The man lost control and both grandson and his father intervened to save the
situation but they received lathi blows and died. The woman struck only her brother-in-
law with the gandasa causing a non-fatal injury. Her husband was convicted for murder
but her punishment was reduced to causing grievous hurt because it appeared that the
whole thing was a spot happening and not a planned affair.221.
Where the genesis of the verbal wrangle between the neighbours was not known, but it
appeared to have arisen suddenly, there being no chance for common intention to be
formulated, each attacker was held to be punishable for his individual acts.222.
Where common intention was established the mere fact that one of the culprits
distanced himself from the scene could not absolve him from liability.223.
It is not necessary for bringing a case within the scope of section 34 to find as to who
in fact inflicted the fatal blow. A conviction under the section read with the relevant
substantive provision can be made when the ingredients required by the section are
satisfied and it is not necessary to mention the section number in the judgment.224.
Death of two persons was caused by unprovoked firing by appellants who are police
officials and grievous gunshot injuries to another person. It was not necessary to
assign a specific role to each individual appellant as the firing at the Car was
undoubtedly with a clear intent to annihilate those in it and was resorted to in
furtherance of common intention of all the appellants. The accused were liable to
conviction under section 302/34 IPC, 1860.225. The acts of all the accused need not be
the same or identically similar. All that is necessary is that they all must be actuated by
the one and the same common intention. The fact that two of them caused injuries at
the back of their victim and the injury at the head which proved to be fatal was caused
by the third person, the two co-accused could not claim to be absolved of liability for
murder.226.
It is not necessary for bringing about the conviction of the co-accused to show that he
also committed an overt act for the achievement of their object. The absence of any
overt act or possession of weapon cannot be singularly determinative of absence of
common intention. If common intention by meeting of minds is established in the facts
and circumstances of the case there need not be an overt act or possession of weapon
required, to establish common intention.227.
The accused caught hold of the victim and exhorted the main accused to strike him. On
such exhortation the main accused inflicted a Kirpan wound. The victim died. It was
held that the instigation was only to strike. It could not be said that the accused shared
the intention of the main accused to kill. The conviction was altered from under
sections 202/34 to one under section 324.228. The victim woman was murdered by her
father-in-law and brother-in-law. The third person helped them to conceal the dead body
to screen them. The conviction of the two accused for murder was upheld but that of
the third one only for concealment of evidence under sections 201/34.229.
[s 34.10] Common Intention: How Proved.—
The common intention can be inferred from the circumstances of the case and that the
intention can be gathered from the circumstances as they arise even during an
incident.230. Common intention is a state of mind. It is not possible to read a person's
mind. There can hardly be direct evidence of common intention. The existence or non-
existence of a common intention amongst the accused has to be deciphered
cumulatively from their conduct and behaviour in the facts and circumstances of each
case. Events prior to the occurrence as also after, and during the occurrence, are all
relevant to deduce if there existed any common intention. There can be no straight
jacket formula.231. The Court has to examine the prosecution evidence in regard to
application of section 34 cumulatively and if the ingredients are satisfied, the
consequences must follow. It is difficult to state any hard and fast rule which can be
applied universally to all cases. It will always depend on the facts and circumstances of
the given case whether the person involved in the commission of the crime with a
common intention can be held guilty of the main offence committed by them
together.232. Courts, in most cases, have to infer the intention from the act(s) or
conduct of the accused or other relevant circumstances of the case. However, an
inference as to the common intention shall not be readily drawn; the criminal liability
can arise only when such inference can be drawn with a certain degree of
assurance.233. In most cases it has to be inferred from the act or conduct or other
relevant circumstances of the case in hand.234. This inference can be gathered by the
manner in which the accused arrived on the scene and mounted the attack, the
determination and concert with which the beating was given or the injuries caused by
one or some of them, the acts done by others to assist those causing the injuries, the
concerted conduct subsequent to the commission of the offence, for instance all of
them left the scene of the incident together and other acts which all or some may have
done as would help in determining the common intention. In other words, the totality of
the circumstances must be taken into consideration in arriving at the conclusion
whether the accused had a common intention to commit an offence of which they
could be convicted.235. Manner of attack shows the common intention of accused.236.
The Supreme Court has reiterated:
We reiterate that for common intention, there could rarely be direct evidence. The ultimate
decision, at any rate would invariably depend upon the inference deducible from the
circumstances of each case. It is settled law that the common intention or the intention of
the individuals concerned in furtherance of the common intention could be proved either
from direct evidence or by inference from the acts or attending circumstances of the case
and conduct of the parties.237.
[s 34.11] Complaint.—
In order to attract section 34 of the IPC, 1860, the complaint must, prima facie, reflect a
common prior concert or planning amongst all the accused.238.
[s 34.12] Effect of no charge under section 34.—
Even if section 34 has not been included in a charge framed for the offence under
section 302 IPC, 1860 against the accused, a conviction for the offence under section
302 with the aid of section 34 is not bad as no prejudice would be caused to him.239.
Where the appellants caused injuries not enough to cause the death but the same were
caused by another, in the absence of a charge under section 34, they were found to be
guilty under section 326 of IPC, 1860.240.
Sections 34, 114 and 149 of the IPC, 1860 provide for criminal liability viewed from
different angles as regards actual participants, accessories and men actuated by a
common object or a common intention; and as explained by five Judge Constitution
Bench of in Willie Slavey v The State of MP,241. the charge is a rolled-up one involving
the direct liability and the constructive liability without specifying who are directly liable
and who are sought to be made constructively liable.242. But before a court can convict
a person under section 302, read with section 34, of the Indian Penal Code, it should
come to a definite conclusion that the said person had a prior concert with one or more
other persons, named or unnamed, for committing the said offence. A few illustrations
will bring out the impact of section 34 on different situations.
(1) A, B, C and D are charged under section 302, read with section 34, of the Indian
Penal Code, for committing the murder of E. The evidence is directed to establish that
the said four persons have taken part in the murder.
(2) A, B, C and D and unnamed others are charged under the said sections. But
evidence is adduced to prove that the said persons, along with others, named or
unnamed, participated jointly in the commission of that offence.
(3) A, B, C and D are charged under the said sections. But the evidence is directed to
prove that A, B, C and D, along with 3 others, have jointly committed the offence. As
regards the third illustration, a Court is certainly entitled to come to the conclusion that
one of the named accused is guilty of murder under section 302, read with section 34,
of the Indian Penal Code, though the other three named accused are acquitted, if it
accepts the evidence that the said accused acted in concert along with persons,
named or unnamed, other than those acquitted, in the commission of the offence. In
the second illustration the Court can come to the same conclusion and convict one of
the named accused if it is satisfied that no prejudice has been caused to the accused
by the defect in the charge. But in the first illustration the Court certainly can convict
two or more of the named accused if it accepts the evidence that they acted conjointly
in committing the offence. But what is the position if the Court acquits 3 of the 4
accused either because it rejects the prosecution evidence or because it gives the
benefit of doubt to the said accused? Can it hold, in the absence of a charge as well as
evidence, that though the three accused are acquitted, some other unidentified persons
acted conjointly along with one of the named persons? If the Court could do so, it
would be making out a new case for the prosecution: it would be deciding contrary to
the evidence adduced in the case. A Court cannot obviously make out a case for the
prosecution which is not disclosed either in the charge or in regard to which there is no
basis in the evidence. There must be some foundation in the evidence that persons
other than those named have taken part in the commission of the offence and if there