Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.
Whoever, being a clerk or servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or
servant, commits theft in respect of any property in the possession of his master or
employer, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
COMMENT—
This section provides for a severe punishment when a clerk or servant has committed
theft because he has greater opportunities of committing this offence owing to the
confidence reposed in him. When the possession of the stolen property is with the
master, this section applies; when it is with the servant, section 408 applies. Where
some policemen stole a sum of money shut up in a box, and placed it in the Police
Treasury building, over which they were mounting guard as sentinels, they were held to
have committed an offence under this section and not under section 409.107. Where
the property was not in possession of the master, or the money was entrusted to the
accused and he misappropriated the same, the offence under section 381 will not be
attracted.108.
107. Juggurnath Singh, (1865) 2 WR (Cr) 55; Radhey Shyam v State of UP, 2002 Cr LJ 1227 (All),
domestic servants who were prosecuted for theft and murder of their master remained on duty
even when investigation was going on, nothing was found against them, they were not allowed
to be prosecuted only on the basis of suspicion. Slim Babamiya Sutar v State of Maharashtra,
2000 Cr LJ 2696 (Bom), murder, connection of the accused with it not proved, but two gold
articles of the deceased were recovered from the accused, hence convicted under section 381,
sentence of three years RI reduced to 6 months already undergone, accused directed to be
released. N Narasimha Kumar v State of AP, 2003 Cr LJ 3188 (AP), theft by clerk of the State
Public Service Commission's question papers and stealing xerox copies. Investigating Officer
was not examined. No recovery of question paper from the accused. His conviction was set
aside. State of HP v Dev Prakash, 2003 Cr LJ 2882 (HP), alleged theft of stamp papers from the
strong room of the District Treasury Officer. Not proved.
108. Vijay Kumar v State of Rajasthan 2012 Cr LJ 2790 (Raj).