Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held.
Whenever any unlawful assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of the land
upon which such unlawful assembly is held, or such riot is committed, and any person
having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be punishable with fine not
exceeding one thousand rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such
offence is being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be
committed, do not give the earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the principal
officer at the nearest police-station, and do not, in the case of his or their having
reason to believe that it was about to be committed, use all lawful means in his or
their power to prevent it, and, in the event of its taking place, do not use all lawful
means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot or unlawful assembly.
COMMENT—
Liability of owner or occupier of land used for unlawful assembly.— Many duties of the
police are by law imposed on land-holders. The present section proceeds apparently
upon a presumption that, in addition to any such duty, the owner or occupier of land is
cognizant in a peculiar way of the designs of those who assemble on his land, and is
able not only to give the police notice, but also to prevent and to disperse and suppress
the assembly.212.
Section 45 of the Cr PC, 1973, casts upon the owners and occupiers of land the duty of
preventing a riot on their lands.
Knowledge, on the part of the owner or occupier of the land, of the acts or intentions of
the agent, is not an essential element of an offence under this section, and he may be
convicted under it though he may be in entire ignorance of the acts of his agent or
manager.213. According to some Police Regulations the Police are required to serve a
warning notice on the landlord, owner, occupier or his agent or other person claiming
interest in landed property contemplated in this and the two subsequent sections so
that they may adopt every means in their power to prevent the unlawful assembly or
rioting taking place on such property.214. This being a laudable objective there can
possibly be no objection to the issuance of such a notice. It should, however, be
remembered that a police-officer cannot and should not in the name of serving such a
notice injunct the owner or occupier, even temporarily, from enjoying his property.215.
The police have no such power under the law. To make a person cognizant about his
duties under the law is one thing and to restrain the owner from enjoying his property is
entirely a different thing.
212. M&M 128.
213. Kazi Zeamuddin Ahmed, (1901) 28 Cal 504 ; Payag Singh, (1890) 12 All 550 .
214. Rule 252, Bengal Police Regulations, vol I 1943, p 108.
215. MK Ibrahim, 1979 Cr LJ 175 (Kant); Indu Bhushan v State, 1995 Cr LJ 1180 (Cal).