Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.
When an act is abetted and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act
done, in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had directly abetted it:
Proviso.
Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was
committed under the influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance
of the conspiracy which constituted the abetment.
ILLUSTRATIONS
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison
for that purpose. The child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake
puts the poison into the food of Y, which is by the side of that of Z. Here, if
the child was acting under the influence of A's instigation, and the act done
was under the circumstances a probable consequence of the abetment, A is
liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if he had instigated the
child to put the poison into the food of Y.
(b) A instigates B to burn Z's house. B sets fire to the house and at the same
time commits theft of property there. A, though guilty of abetting the
burning of the house, is not guilty of abetting the theft; for the theft was a
distinct act, and not a probable consequence of the burning.
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the
purpose of robbery, and provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C
break into the house, and being resisted by Z, one of the inmates, murder Z.
Here, if that murder was the probable consequence of the abetment, A is
liable to the punishment provided for murder.
COMMENTS.—
Liability of abettor when different act done.—This section proceeds on the maxim
"every man is presumed to intend the natural consequences of his act". If one man
instigates another to perpetrate a particular crime, and that other, in pursuance of such
instigation, not only perpetrates that crime, but, in the course of doing so, commits
another crime in furtherance of it, the former is criminally responsible as an abettor in
respect of such last-mentioned crime, if it is one which, as a reasonable man, he must,
at the time of the instigation, have known would, in the ordinary course of things,
probably have to be committed in order to carry out the original crime. B and C
instigated A to rob the deceased on his return to home after receiving a sum of money;
whereupon A killed the deceased. A was convicted of murder and B and C of offences
under sections 109, 302.94. Where the act contemplated and instigated was no more
than a thrashing with a lathi, but one of the assailants suddenly took out a spearhead
from his pocket and fatally stabbed the person who was to be thrashed, the others
were not held liable for murder or abetment of murder.95.
94. Mathura Das, (1884) 6 All 491 , 494.
95. Girja Prasad, (1934) 57 All 717 .