Injuring or defiling place of worship with intent to insult the religion of
any class.
Whoever destroys, damages or defiles 1 any place of worship, or any object2. held
sacred by any class of persons3. with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of
any class of persons or with the knowledge that any class of persons is likely to
consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their religion, shall be
punishble with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT.—
The object of this section is to punish those persons who intentionally wound the
religious feelings of others by injuring or defiling a place of worship. This section is
intended to prevent wanton insult to the religious notions of a class of persons.2
[s 295.1] Ingredients.—
This section requires two things—
1. Destruction, damage or defilement of (a) any place of worship or (b) any object
held sacred by a class of persons.
2. Such destruction, etc., must have been done (i) with the intention of insulting the
religion of a class of persons, or (ii) with the knowledge that a class of persons is
likely to consider such destruction, etc., as an insult to their religion.
1. 'Defiles'.—This word is not to be restricted in meaning to acts that would make an
object of worship unclean as a material object, but extends to acts done in relation to
the object of worship which would render such object ritually impure.3
2. 'Object'.—The word 'object' does not include animate objects. It refers only to
inanimate objects such as churches, mosques, temples, and marble or stone figures
representing gods.4. Killing of a cow by a Mohammedan, within the sight of a public
road frequented by Hindus, is not punishable under this section.5. Similarly, where a bull
dedicated and set at large on a ceremonial occasion of Hindus in accordance with a
religious usage was killed by certain Mohammedans secretly and at night in the
presence of none but Mohammedans; it was held that no offence was committed.6.
Any object, however trivial or destitute of real value in itself, if regarded as sacred by
any class of persons would come within the meaning of this section nor is it absolutely