Adulteration of drugs.
Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a manner as to lessen
the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make it
noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will
be sold or used for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both.
State Amendments
Orissa.—1. Same as in section 272, the amendments were made by Orissa Act No. 3 of
1999, s. 2.
Uttar Pradesh.—1. The following amendments were made by U.P. Act No. 47 of 1975, s.
3(ii), (w.e.f. 15-9-1975).
In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh in S. 274, for the words, "shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six
months, or with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both,
substitute the following words.—
"shall be punished with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for
life."
2. The offence is cognizable, non-bailable and triable by Court of Session, vide U.P. Act
No. 47 of 1975.
West Bengal.—1. The following amendments were made by W.B. Act No. 42 of 1973, s.
3(iii) (w.e.f. 29-4-1973).
In its application to the State of West Bengal, in s. 274, for the words "of either
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both", substitute the following.—
"for life with or without fine:
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment which is less than imprisonment for
life."
2. The offence is cognizable, non-bailable and triable by Court of Session, vide W.B. Act
No. 34 of 1974.
COMMENT.—
To preserve the purity of drugs for medicinal purposes this section is enacted. It is
sufficient if the efficacy of a drug is lessened, it need not necessarily become noxious
to life.
For local amendment see comment under section 272 ante.