Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to
die after birth.
Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby
preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does
by such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die after its birth,
shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the
mother, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both.
COMMENT.—
Any act done with the intention here mentioned which results in the destruction of the
child's life, whether before or after its birth, is made punishable. So far as offence
punishable under section 315 of the IPC, 1860 is concerned, the offence is committed
by a person who before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby
preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does
by such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, if
such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the
mother.704. Cognizance taken of the offence under section 315 of IPC, 1860 and the
charge framed therein against the petitioner are also not maintainable in view of the
fact that no documentary evidence could be collected in course of investigation in
support of the allegation that the pregnancy of the prosecutrix was terminated at the
instance of the petitioner. She was even not medically examined by the Doctor or the
Board of Doctors and there is no medical report in support of the allegation that her
pregnancy was ever terminated at any earlier point of time. As the alleged offence
under section 315 of the IPC, 1860 relates to termination of pregnancy, such offence
may be supported through the medical opinion of the registered practitioner and for
want of such prima facie material charge cannot be framed in such section, accordingly
the cognizance cannot be taken for the offence under section 315 of the IPC, 1860.705.
Intention is one of the major ingredients of sections 315. Wording of section 315 of the
IPC, 1860 itself shows that whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the
intention of thereby preventing that child from being born alive or causing it to die after
its birth, and does by such act prevent that child from being born alive, or causes it to
die after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving
the life of the mother be punished with imprisonment. In this case the patient was
admitted for delivery. During course of delivery there was rupture of uterus which led to
bleeding and subsequent death of the patient and the child. So, it is not case of any
prosecution witness that the respondent deliberately committed offence punishable
under section 315 of the IPC, 1860.706.
704. State of Maharashtra v Rajendra Ramkisan Jaiswal, 2010 Cr LJ 3603 (Bom).
705. Girish Kumar Sharan v State of Jharkhand, AIR 2010 Cr LJ 4215 (Jhar).
706. State of Maharashtra v Rajendra Ramkisan Jaiswal, 2010 Cr LJ 3603 (Bom)